if he should beget other suns?'miserably in our arid homes.  What will be our future condition
he is single, parches up the marsh, and compels us to die
cause of their complaint.  One of them said, "The Sun, now while
Jupiter, disturbed by the noise of their croaking, inquired the
wife, the Frogs lifted up their voices in clamor to the sky. 
ONCE UPON A TIME, when the Sun announced his intention to take a
The Frogs' Complaint Against the Sun 
bloomest for ever in renewed youth."  
by an early doom.  But thou art immortal and dost never fade, but
season! If no cruel hand pluck me from my stem, yet I must perish
replied, "I indeed, dear Amaranth, flourish but for a brief
and with men.  I envy you your beauty and your perfume."  The Rose
it:  "What a lovely flower is the Rose, a favorite alike with Gods
AN AMARANTH planted in a garden near a Rose-Tree, thus addressed
The Rose and the Amaranth 
little pleasant food I have deprived myself of my life."  
exclaimed, "O foolish creature that I am! For the sake of a
reeds, caught her.  The Thrush, being at the point of death,
staying so long in one spot, and having well bird-limed his
because its berries were so delicious.  A Fowler observed her
A THRUSH was feeding on a myrtle-tree and did not move from it
The Thrush and the Fowler 
your cost."  
effort, the man let him go and said, "Conquer, but conquer to
endeavoring to pull him back.  When the Ass persisted in his
of throwing himself over, his owner seized him by the tail,
bolted to the brink of a deep precipice.  While he was in the act
AN ASS, being driven along a high road, suddenly started off and
The Ass and His Driver 
fail in the performance."  
that I would not have promised, however much I knew that I must
replied, "That I might attain your royal hand, there is nothing
Eagle, "the faithful fulfillment of your promise to me?'  The Kite
length of time it had lain about the fields.  "Is this," said the
air, brought back the shabbiest possible mouse, stinking from the
the ostrich you promised me."  The Kite, soaring aloft into the
after the nuptials, the Eagle said, "Fly off and bring me back
persuaded by these words, accepted him as her mate.  Shortly
caught and carried away an ostrich in my talons."  The Eagle,
secure the means of living by your plunder?'  "Well, I have often
Kite, "I am much stronger than you are."  "Why, are you able to
for me, and am not able to find one."  "Take me," returned the
with such a rueful look?'  "I seek," she replied, "a mate suitable
tree in company with a Kite.  "Why," said the Kite, "do I see you
AN EAGLE, overwhelmed with sorrow, sat upon the branches of a
The Eagle and the Kite 
it at all.  
leaves, the snow fell through to the ground, and did not injure
and killing the tree.  But finding the Fig-Tree denuded of
them down with its weight, at once despoiling it of its beauty
Olive full of foliage, it settled upon its branches and broke
the seasons.  A shower of snow fell upon them, and, finding the
green all the year round, the Fig-Tree changed its leaves with
THE OLIVE-TREE ridiculed the Fig-Tree because, while she was
The Olive-Tree and the Fig-Tree 
incurred a heavier penalty."  
human blood, I wish that I could have killed you even if I had
an ill-favored and contemptible insect who delights in sucking
myself, because I know there was no intention to hurt.  But you,
injury?'  The Bald Man replied, "I can easily make peace with
tiny insect, see what you have done to yourself to add insult to
"You who have wished to revenge, even with death, the Prick of a
it, gave himself a heavy slap.  Escaping, the Fly said mockingly,
A FLY bit the bare head of a Bald Man who, endeavoring to destroy
The Bald Man and the Fly 
second time of your wings."  
former owner, lest he should again hunt for you and deprive you a
exclaimed, "Do not cultivate the favor of this man, but of your
it at once as an offering to his benefactor.  A Fox, seeing this,
again.  The Eagle took flight, and pouncing upon a hare, brought
another neighbor purchased him and allowed his feathers to grow
which treatment the Eagle was weighed down with grief.  Later,
wings and put him into his poultry-yard with the other birds, at
AN EAGLE was once captured by a man, who immediately clipped his
The Eagle and His Captor 
all these things, changed his mind, and commiserated the Horse.  
wounded and fell dead on the battlefield.  Then the Ass, seeing
charge, rushed into the very midst of the enemy.  The Horse was
a heavily armed soldier mounted the Horse, and riding him to the
eat and not even that without hard work.  But when war broke out,
carefully provided for, while he himself had scarcely enough to
AN ASS congratulated a Horse on being so ungrudgingly and
The Ass and the Charger 
who injured me."  
aside, therefore, your fears.  I return as an enemy only to those
life with stones, and those who gave me food    
Panther made this reply:  "I remember alike those who sought my
their flocks and begged only for their lives.  To them the
spared his life, fearing for their safety, surrendered to him
had attacked him, raged with angry fury.  Then they who had
forth and slaughtered the cattle, and, killing the Shepherds who
hastened to his den with rapid steps.  After a few days he came
strength, freed himself with a sudden bound from the pit, and
dead.  The Panther, however, when he had recruited his feeble
any danger, but supposing that on the morrow they would find him
prolong his life.  At night they returned home, not dreaming of
die even though no one should hurt him, threw in some food to
stones, while others, moved with compassion towards one about to
discovered him, and some threw sticks at him and pelted him with
A PANTHER, by some mischance, fell into a pit.  The Shepherds
The Panther and the Shepherds 
him horns, but even deprived him of a portion of his ears.  
strength of body, and desired yet more, not only refused to give
at his request because he was not satisfied with his size and
to Jupiter, and besought him to give him horns.  Jupiter, vexed
and wished that he himself could obtain the same honors.  He went
THE CAMEL, when he saw the Bull adorned with horns, envied him
The Camel and Jupiter 
restored to his friends.  
free again in the forest, and the Shepherd to be pardoned and
King, as soon as he heard the tale, ordered the Lion to be set
attacking him, approached and placed his foot upon his lap.  The
recognized the Shepherd as the man who healed him, and instead of
crime.  But when the Lion was released from his cage, he
"to be cast to the Lions" as the punishment for his imputed
Shepherd, being imprisoned on a false accusation, was condemned
pain, the Lion returned into the forest.  Some time after, the
placing his paw upon his lap, pulled it out; thus relieved of his
Shepherd boldly examined the beast, discovered the thorn, and
his tail as if to say, "I am a suppliant, and seek your aid."  The
afterward he came up to a Shepherd and fawned upon him, wagging
A LION, roaming through a forest, trod upon a thorn.  Soon
The Lion and the Shepherd 
to take from everyone, and never to give anything in return."  
fellow if you expect to get anything from me, who am accustomed
meal.  The File replied, "You must indeed be a simple-minded
addressed himself to a File, and asked of him the favor of a
the means of satisfying his hunger.  He more particularly
A LION, entering the workshop of a smith, sought from the tools
The Viper and the File 
any wound."  
thought so little of, for I have lost nothing, nor am I hurt with
misfortunes.  The other replied, "I am indeed glad that I was
The Mule which had been robbed and wounded bewailed his
which they greedily seized while taking no notice of the grain. 
owners, wounded with a sword the Mule carrying the treasure,
them from their hiding-places, and in the scuffle with their
with quiet and easy step.  All of a sudden Robbers rushed upon
clear-toned bells fastened to his neck.  His companion followed
conscious of the value of his burden, and tossed up and down the
The Mule carrying the treasure walked with head erect, as if
panniers filled with money, the other sacks weighted with grain. 
TWO MULES well-laden with packs were trudging along.  One carried
The Mules and the Robbers 
fury."  
suddenly falling on me create these waves, and lash me into
nature as calm and firm even as this earth; but the winds
"Blame not me, my good sir, but the winds, for I am by my own
them.  The Sea, assuming the form of a woman, replied to him:
induced them to plow its waters, it grew rough and destroyed
it enticed men with the calmness of its looks, but when it had
looking upon the Sea, loaded it with reproaches.  He argued that
after his buffetings with the deep.  After a while he awoke, and
A SHIPWRECKED MAN, having been cast upon a certain shore, slept
The Shipwrecked Man and the Sea 
feeling no manner of inconvenience, made no further complaints.  
time went on, the rich man became accustomed to the smell, and
that he would leave soon.  But as he still continued to stay, as
away.  The Tanner put off his departure from time to time, saying
unpleasant smell of the tan-yard, he pressed his neighbor to go
A RICH MAN lived near a Tanner, and not being able to bear the
The Rich Man and the Tanner 
be eaten by you."  
"It would be better for me to be sacrificed in the Temple than to
sacrifice, if he should catch you."  On which the Lamb replied,
The Wolf called out to him and said, "The Priest will slay you in
A WOLF pursued a Lamb, which fled for refuge to a certain Temple. 
The Lamb and the Wolf 
Elephant."  ftp://foo.bar/bla
dead.  I find myself, even as I am, better off than the
afraid of a tiny gnat, I will no more complain, nor wish myself
die presently."  The Lion said, "Well, since so huge a beast is
buzzing insect? If it enters my ear, my fate is sealed.  I should
the head of the Elephant, and he replied, "Do you see that little
tremor every now and then.  Just at that moment a Gnat settled on
inquired what was the matter and why his ears moved with such a
observed that the Elephant shook his ears very often, and he
came close to hold a conversation with him.  After a time he
As these thoughts passed through his mind, he met an Elephant and
reproaching himself with his cowardice, wished that he might die. 
hearing this the Lion groaned and lamented very much and,
your courage never fails you except in this one instance."  On
have given you all the attributes which I possess myself, and
a cock."  Jupiter replied, "Why do you blame me without a cause? I
that being such as I am, I should be frightened by the crowing of
over all the beasts of the forest, and what a disgrace it is,
provided with teeth, and feet furnished with claws, and I lord it
handsome in shape, and powerful in attack.  I have jaws well
true, O Jupiter!"  he said, "that I am gigantic in strength,
THE LION wearied Jupiter with his frequent complaints.  "It is
The Lion, Jupiter, and the Elephant 
more timid than ourselves."  
intended; for you now see that there are creatures who are still
cried out to his companions:  "Stay, my friends, do not do as you
seeing the rapid disappearance of the Frogs, one of the Hares
feet and ftp://foo.bar/baz rushed helter-skelter to the deep water for safety.  On
Frogs lying on the banks of the lake heard the noise of their
scampered off in large numbers to carry out their resolve, the
jumping from a lofty precipice into a deep lake below.  As they
determined to put an end to themselves and their troubles by
the perpetual alarm to which they were exposed, with one accord
THE HARES, oppressed by their own exceeding timidity and weary of
The Hares and the Frogs 
Some men underrate their best blessings.  
dare to describe me as useless, and unprofitable?'  
you, while receiving benefits from me and resting under my shade,
Plane-Tree, interrupting him, said, "You ungrateful fellows! Do
It bears no fruit, and is not of the least service to man."  The
said to the other, "What a singularly useless tree is the Plane!
Plane-Tree.  As they rested under its shade, one of the Travelers
themselves down at noon under the widespreading branches of a
TWO TRAVELERS, worn out by the heat of the summer's sun, laid
The Travelers and the Plane-Tree 
know how I got out of the house."  
truth, I drank so much wine that I remember nothing.  I do not
he had enjoyed his supper.  He replied, "Why, to tell you the
attracted other street dogs, who came up to him and inquired how
ground and limped away, howling dreadfully.  His yelling soon
without ceremony out of the window.  He fell with force upon the
dishes and, seizing him by his fore and hind paws, bundled him
pleasure to his friend, the Cook saw him moving about among his
was congratulating himself and wagging his tail to convey his
care and eat enough to last me both today and tomorrow."  While he
I came! I do not often get such a chance as this.  I will take
entertainment, said in the joy of his heart, "How glad I am that
appointed, and seeing the preparations for so grand an
with me tonight."  The Dog thus invited went at the hour
a feast, and there is always much food remaining; come and sup
invite a stranger Dog, a friend of his, saying, "My master gives
and acquaintances.  His Dog availed himself of the occasion to
A RICH MAN gave a great feast, to which he invited many friends
The Dog and the Cook 
intentions.  
The safeguards of virtue are hateful to those with evil
business."  
you wake your neighbors, you entirely put an end to our
reason why we must the more kill you," they replied; "for when
wake them up in the night to their work."  "That is the very
for his life:  "Pray spare me; I am very serviceable to men.  I
arriving at home they prepared to kill the Cock, who thus pleaded
whom they stole, and got off as fast as they could.  Upon
SOME THIEVES broke into a house and found nothing but a Cock,
The Thieves and the Cock 
small or large, ought to be tolerated."  
shall certainly die by mine own hands, for no evil, whether it be
possibly do you much harm."  The Man, laughing, replied, "Now you
sir, pray spare my life, and destroy me not, for I cannot
so much trouble in catching you?'  The Flea replied, "O my dear
said, "Who are you who dare to feed on my limbs, and to cost me
A MAN, very much annoyed with a Flea, caught him at last, and
The Flea and the Man 
relations."  
willing to save it at the cost of betraying your friends and
shall now with less scruple take your life, because you are
you in recompense for your mercy to me."  The Fowler replied, "I
master, permit me to live and I will entice many Partridges to
Partridge earnestly begged him to spare his life, saying, "Pray,
A FOWLER caught a Partridge and was about to kill it.  The
The Partridge and the Fowler 
take wing.  
birdcatcher threw down the twigs, and the noise made the Dove
perceiving his design, stung him in the foot.  In pain the
his lime-twigs for the Dove, which sat in the branches.  The Ant,
afterwards a birdcatcher came and stood under the tree, and laid
climbed onto it and floated in safety to the bank.  Shortly
a leaf and let it fall into the stream close to her.  The Ant
drowning.  A Dove sitting on a tree overhanging the water plucked
being carried away by the rush of the stream, was on the point of
AN ANT went to the bank of a river to quench its thirst, and
The Ant and the Dove 
unsuspected danger.  
They who act without sufficient thought, will often fall into
folly in thinking that everything round must be an egg."  
in his stomach, he said, "I deserve all this torment, for my
supposing it to be an egg.  Soon afterwards suffering great pain
to its widest extent, swallowed it down with the utmost relish,
A DOG, used to eating eggs, saw an Oyster and, opening his mouth
The Dog and the Oyster 
The gift of a friend?'  
which the Lion jeeringly replied, "It was righteously yours, eh?
"You have unrighteously taken that which was mine from me!"  To
it from him.  Standing at a safe distance, the Wolf exclaimed,
his lair.  A Lion met him in the path, and seizing the lamb, took
A WOLF, having stolen a lamb from a fold, was carrying him off to
The Wolf and the Lion 
me, who am myself always accustomed to fasten upon others."  
really must have been out of your senses to fasten yourself on
the hedge itself.  The Bramble, interrupting him, said, "But you
he had fled to her for assistance, she had used him worse than
tom the soles of his feet, he accused the Bramble because, when
hold of a Bramble to save himself.  Having pricked and grievously
A FOX was mounting a hedge when he lost his footing and caught
The Fox and the Bramble 
thus prolong my life to a good old age."  
strong.  I know whom I may bully and whom I must flatter; and I
To this the Crow replied, "I despise the weak and yield to the
this way, you would have had your deserts from his sharp teeth."
for a long time, and at last said, "If you had treated a dog in
Sheep, much against his will, carried her backward and forward
A TROUBLESOME CROW seated herself on the back of a Sheep.  The
The Crow and the Sheep 
nobody, and lost his Ass in the bargain.  
convinced that by endeavoring to please everybody he had pleased
man, vexed and ashamed, made the best of his way home again,
tumbling off the pole, fell into the river.  Upon this, the old
that he was subject to, broke the cords that bound him and,
it, till the Ass, not liking the noise nor the strange handling
This entertaining sight brought the people in crowds to laugh at
their shoulders over a bridge near the entrance to the town. 
together and with the help of a pole endeavored to carry him on
try."  So, alighting with his son, they tied the legs of the Ass
he you."  "Anything to please you," said the old man; "we can but
Why, you two fellows are better able to carry the poor beast than
not have thought so," said the other, "by the way you load him. 
that Ass your own?'  "Yes," replied the old man.  "O, one would
reached the town.    "Pray, honest friend," said a citizen, "is
immediately took up his son behind him.  They had now almost
hardly keep pace by the side of you?'  The good-natured Miller
can you ride upon the beast, while that poor little lad there can
"Why, you lazy old fellow," cried several tongues at once, "how
proceeded far when they met a company of women and children:
son dismount, and got up himself.  In this manner they had not
the old man rest his weary limbs."  Upon this the old man made his
old father has to walk? Get down, you young scapegrace, and let
old age in these days? Do you see that idle lad riding while his
them, "it proves what I was a-saying.  What respect is shown to
up to a group of old men in earnest debate.  "There," said one of
continued to walk along merrily by his side.  Presently they came
man hearing this, quickly made his son mount the Ass, and
trudging along the road on foot when they might ride?'  The old
there," cried one of them, "did you ever see such fellows, to be
women collected round a well, talking and laughing.  "Look
to sell him.  They had not gone far when they met with a troop of
A MILLER and his son were driving their Ass to a neighboring fair
The Miller, His Son, and Their Ass 
ask me? Is it that the level way through the desert is closed?"
poor beast replied, not without a touch of reason:  "Why do you
asked him which he would like best, to go up hill or down.  The
AN ARAB CAMEL-DRIVER, after completing the loading of his Camel,
The Camel and the Arab 
be like us in outside appearances.  
It matters little if those who are inferior to us in merit should
so long as they are not your equals in strength or courage."  
enjoy an empty honor and to assume the badge of your nobler sex,
females equaled them in dignity.  "Allow them," said Jupiter, "to
He-Goats were sorely displeased and made complaint that the
THE SHE-GOATS having obtained a beard by request to Jupiter, the
The She-Goats and Their Beards 
Nature exceeds nurture.  
disappointed and again caused her to return to her former shape. 
couch and pursued the mouse, wishing to eat it.  Venus was much
Cat, quite forgetting her present condition, started up from the
habits of life, let down a mouse in the middle of the room.  The
discover if the Cat in her change of shape had also altered her
While the two were reclining in their chamber, Venus wishing to
youth saw her and loved her, and took her home as his bride. 
request and transformed her into a beautiful damsel, so that the
to change her into the form of a woman.  Venus consented to her
A CAT fell in love with a handsome young man, and entreated Venus
The Cat and Venus 
We had better bear our troubles bravely than try to escape them. 
in, from which he died not many days later.  
Prince fell down in a fainting fit.  A violent fever suddenly set
finger and caused great pain and inflammation, so that the young
might beat the lion.  But one of the tree's prickles pierced his
thorn-tree, meaning to cut a stick from its branches so that he
you?'  With these words he stretched out his hands toward a
in this palace as if I had been a girl:  what shall I now do to
father's, which he saw in his sleep, I am shut up on your account
"O you most detestable of animals! through a lying dream of my
confined burst out afresh, and, standing near the lion, he said:
lion.  When the young Prince saw this, his grief at being thus
kinds of life-sized animals, among which was the picture of a
pleasant palace and adorned its walls for his amusement with all
Afraid the dream should prove true, he built for his son a
in which he was warned that his son would be killed by a lion. 
A KING, whose only son was fond of martial exercises, had a dream
The King's Son and the Painted Lion 
make you a present of the hare."  
called out to him and said, "Get along with you! for I will now
the distance between them.  The Hunter, sorely against his will,
sure of overtaking him, but the Horseman increased more and more
off as fast as he could.  The Hunter ran after him, as if he was
purchasing it.  However, when the Horseman got the hare, he rode
horseback who begged the hare of him, under the pretense of
shoulders and set out homewards.  On his way he met a man on
A CERTAIN HUNTER, having snared a hare, placed it upon his
The Hunter and the Horseman 
deemed a happy windfall the source of my destruction."  
the bird exclaimed:  "O unhappy me! who have found in that which I
about, bit the Crow with a mortal wound.  In the agony of death,
nook, and flying down, greedily seized him.  The Serpent, turning
A CROW in great want of food saw a Serpent asleep in a sunny
The Crow and the Serpent 
he said, "this shows what sort of judges you are."  
most positive proof the greatness of their mistake.  "Look here,"
rustic produced the little pig from his cloak and showed by the
the Countryman to be kicked out of the theater.  On this the
Buffoon had given a far more exact imitation, and clamored for
squeak.  The Crowd, however, cried out with one consent that the
contrived to take hold of and to pull his ear causing the pig to
(which in truth he did, but not suspected by the audience )
pretending that he concealed a little pig beneath his clothes
cheers of the spectators.  Next the Countryman commenced, and
first, and obtained, as on the preceding day, the applause and
appeared on the stage.  The Buffoon grunted and squeaked away
Countryman than to see the spectacle.  Both of the performers
generally prevailed, and the audience came rather to ridicule the
theater, but now partiality for their favorite actor very
natural way.  On the morrow a still larger crowd assembled in the
would do the same thing on the next day, though in a much more
shall not beat me at that trick!"  and at once proclaimed that he
observing all that has passed, said, "So help me, Hercules, he
loaded him with the loudest applause.  A Countryman in the crowd,
was done and nothing was found, they cheered the actor, and
his cloak, and demanded that it should be shaken out.  When that
with his voice that the audience declared he had a porker under
bosom and imitated the squeaking of a little pig so admirably
caused an intense silence.  He suddenly bent his head towards his
apparatus or confederates, and the very sense of expectation
The Buffoon appeared alone upon the platform, without any
made a great stir, and the theater was crowded in every part. 
brought out on any stage before.  This report being spread about
said that he had a kind of entertainment which had never been
came a Buffoon well known among the populace for his jokes, and
Various public performers contended for the prize.  Among them
any person who invented a new amusement for the occasion. 
people, and gave a public notice that he would handsomely reward
A RICH NOBLEMAN once opened the theaters without charge to the
The Buffoon and the Countryman 
all, beginning with yourself?'  
vipers which, when they shall have grown, will inflict injury on
had done, said, "You silly creature! why have you hatched these
warm, nourished them into life.  A Swallow, observing what she
A HEN finding the eggs of a viper and carefully keeping them
The Hen and the Swallow 
Try before you trust.  
pleases?'  
friend who is able to fly away from his bargain whenever he
find surety for your good faith, for how can I trust anyone as a
"I have no objection, but you must excuse me for requiring you to
alliance with him to their mutual advantage.  The Lion replied,
AN EAGLE stayed his flight and entreated a Lion to make an
The Lion and the Eagle 
huntsmen and hounds.  
to snatch a lamb from the fold, but he himself fell prey to the
would capture it on his own account.  The next day he attempted
share, and said that he would no longer find out the prey, but
The Fox soon became jealous of the Lion carrying off the Lion's
and pointed out the prey; the Lion sprang on it and seized it. 
accordance with his own nature and powers.  The Fox discovered
becoming his servant.  Each undertook his proper duty in
A FOX entered into partnership with a Lion on the pretense of
The Lion and the Fox 
the water alike refused shelter to a murderer.  
crocodile caught him and ate him.  Thus the earth, the air, and
being greatly alarmed, he threw himself into the river, where a
He found a serpent in the upper branches of the tree, and again
Lion on its bank and being fearfully afraid, climbed up a tree. 
man whom he murdered.  On his reaching the river Nile he saw a
A MAN committed a murder, and was pursued by the relations of the
The Manslayer 
few, but is now with all men."  
She made answer, "Because in former times, falsehood was with
"have you left the city to dwell alone here in the wilderness?"
"My name is Truth," she replied.  "And for what cause," he asked,
alone and terribly dejected.  He inquired of her, "Who art thou?"
A WAYFARING MAN, traveling in the desert, met a woman standing
Truth and the Traveler 
benefit."  
little matter now.  will by and by confer on me a greater
replied, "Thank you.  But I can't think that you, who refuse me a
evening, I will give you a little sack full of barley."  The Ass
dignity, and if you will come when I reach my own stall in the
eating I will give it you for the sake of my own superior
"Yes," said the Horse; "if any remains out of what I am now
AN ASS besought a Horse to spare him a small portion of his feed. 
The Ass and the Horse 
use I gave credence to the words of a woman!"  
forsooth!
and supperless, so contrary to his wont.  He replied:  "Why,
his den, Mistress Wolf inquired of him why he returned wearied
words, went home, gasping with cold and hunger.  When he reached
Wolf should come, we will kill him."  The Wolf, hearing these
fondling her child and saying:  "You are quiet now, and if the
day waiting at the door.  In the evening he heard the same woman
out of the window, and the Wolf shall eat you."  The Wolf sat all
heard a Mother say to her child, "Be quiet, or I will throw you
food.  As he passed the door of a cottage built in the forest, he
A FAMISHED WOLF was prowling about in the morning in search of
The Mother and the Wolf 
what we do is useful, the glory of it is vain."  
Jupiter, "My daughter, you are rightly called wise; for unless
the olive is more dear to me on account of its fruit."  Then said
for the fruit."  But said Minerva, "Let anyone say what he will
Jupiter replied, "It is lest we should seem to covet the honor
trees not yielding fruit, inquired the reason for their choice. 
Hercules the poplar.  Minerva, wondering why they had preferred
oak, Venus the myrtle, Apollo the laurel, Cybele the pine, and
trees to be under their special protection.  Jupiter chose the
THE GODS, according to an ancient legend, made choice of certain
The Trees Under the Protection of the Gods 
that no dependence can be placed on your valor."  
have experienced with what speed you run away, know right well
till you can deceive others who do not know you.  I, indeed, who
your sword in its sheath and hold your equally useless tongue,
the more encouraged, believing them to be true; but now put up
even if it had been only with those words, for I should have been
Robber made answer, "I only wish that you had helped me just now,
learn whom he has attacked."  On this, he who had fought with the
traveling cloak said, "I'll at him, and I'll take care he shall
companion ran up and drew his sword, and then, throwing back his
with his stout right hand.  The Robber being slain, the timid
one fled away; the other stood his ground and defended himself
TWO SOLDIERS traveling together were set upon by a Robber.  The
The Two Soldiers and the Robber 
Self-interest alone moves some men.  
sacred, took great care of it.  
honeycomb, he threw down his axe, and looking on the tree as
tree, he found a hive full of honey.  Having tasted the
and a third blow with his axe.  When he reached the hollow of the
He paid no attention to their request, but gave the tree a second
to spare it, and they would sing to him and lighten his labors. 
entreated him not to cut down the tree that sheltered them, but
bold stroke at its roots.  The grasshoppers and sparrows
resolved to cut it down, and taking his axe in his hand, made a
only served as a harbor for the sparrows and grasshoppers.  He
A PEASANT had in his garden an Apple-Tree which bore no fruit but
The Peasant and the Apple-Tree 
It is absurd to ape our betters.  
assembly.  
indignation, set upon him with clubs and drove him out of the
utterly ridiculous a manner that the Beasts, in a fit of
in his turn and dance for their amusement.  He moved about in so
divert to himself the favor of the guests, proposed to stand up
envious of the praises bestowed on the Monkey and desiring to
assembly, he sat down amidst universal applause.  The Camel,
the Monkey stood up and danced.  Having vastly delighted the
THE BEASTS of the forest gave a splendid entertainment at which
The Monkey and the Camel 
seized her, and put her to death.  
her voice, eagerly flew up.  The Owl came forth from her hollow,
The Grasshopper, who was thirsty, and pleased with the praise of
you do not dislike it, come to me and we will drink it together."
myself in drinking some nectar which Pallas lately gave me.  If
believe me, is sweet as the lyre of Apollo, I shall indulge
"Since I cannot sleep," she said, "on account of your song which,
were despised, the Owl attacked the chatterer by a stratagem. 
When she saw that she could get no redress and that her words
desist, and chirped louder and louder the more the Owl entreated. 
besought her to stop chirping.  The Grasshopper refused to
was greatly disturbed by the noise of a Grasshopper and earnestly
AN OWL, accustomed to feed at night and to sleep during the day,
The Grasshopper and the Owl 
all other men, but you destroy the clothes of him who feeds you."
most ungrateful creatures! You provide wool to make garments for
the Shepherd came down and saw what was done, he said, "O you
eating the acorns inadvertently frayed and tore the cloak.  When
he climbed up into the tree and shook them down.  The Sheep
size full of acorns, and spreading his cloak under the branches,
A SHEPHERD driving his Sheep to a wood, saw an oak of unusual
The Shepherd and the Sheep 
Attempt not impossibilities.  
drinking long before they reached the hides.  
up the river, but it happened that they burst themselves with
in a river.  Not being able to reach them, they agreed to drink
SOME DOGS famished with hunger saw a number of cowhides steeping
The Dogs and the Hides 
and would not permit the shepherd to approach.  
to defend themselves, asserted her exclusive right to the place
the bodyguard of her Whelps, who had now grown up and were able
shepherd again consented.  But at last the Bitch, protected by
besought permission to rear her puppies in the same spot.  The
where she might litter.  When her request was granted, she
A BITCH, ready to whelp, earnestly begged a shepherd for a place
The Bitch and Her Whelps 
eyes of their neighbors.  
Some men are of more consequence in their own eyes than in the
when you go away."  
replied, "I did not know you had come, and I shall not miss you
inquired of the Bull if he would like him to go.  The Bull
Just as he was about to fly off, he made a buzzing noise, and
A GNAT settled on the horn of a Bull, and sat there a long time. 
The Gnat and the Bull 
Youth's first duty is reverence to parents.  
grave-hillock.  
her crest, which is popularly said to be her father's
else to do, she buried him in her own head.  Hence she obtained
uninterred for five days, and on the sixth day, not knowing what
she could find no place of burial for him.  She let him lie
earth itself, and when her father died, as there was no earth,
THE LARK (according to an ancient legend) was created before the
The Lark Burying Her Father 
enjoyment."  
strong enough to cheat you, but which will never reward you with
indeed, sir, sadly deceiving yourself; you are indulging a hope
and learning the reason of his doing so, said to him, "You are
hope that the figs would ripen.  A Fox seeing him sitting so long
produced some fruit entirely out of season, and waited in the
A HALF-FAMISHED JACKDAW seated himself on a fig-tree, which had
The Jackdaw and the Fox 
What is most truly valuable is often underrated.  
which have proved my destruction."  
would have saved me I despised, and I gloried in these antlers
himself:  "Woe is me! How I have deceived myself! These feet which
up to him and caught him.  When too late, he thus reproached
wood he became entangled by his horns, and the Lion quickly came
himself easily at a safe distance from the Lion.  But entering a
utmost speed, as long as the plain was smooth and open kept
him.  The Stag immediately took to flight, and exerting his
himself, a Lion appeared at the pool and crouched to spring upon
such slender and weak feet.  While he was thus contemplating
and variety of his horns, but felt angry with himself for having
own shadow reflected in the water, he greatly admired the size
A STAG overpowered by heat came to a spring to drink.  Seeing his
The Stag at the Pool 
others, and yet are often blind to their own failings.  
faults.  Hence it is that men are quick to see the faults of
his neighbors' faults, and a large bag behind filled with his own
with two bags suspended from his neck   all bag in front full of
EVERY MAN, according to an ancient legend, is born into the world
The Two Bags 
A man is known by the company he keeps.  
companion."  
that he will be just the same as the one he chose for his
made a trial of him, he answered, "I do not need a trial; I know
owner.  On being asked how, in so short a time, he could have
Seeing this, the man put a halter on him and led him back to his
one that was most idle and the greatest eater of them all. 
which the new animal left all the others and at once joined the
Ass home and put him in the straw-yard with his other Asses, upon
he should try out the animal before he bought him.  He took the
A MAN wished to purchase an Ass, and agreed with its owner that
The Ass and His Purchaser 
fellow who with the same breath blows hot and cold."  
can no longer consider you as a friend," said the Satyr, "a
he said that he did it to cool the meat, which was too hot.  "I
mouth and blew in it.  When the Satyr again inquired the reason,
scalding.  The Man raised one of the dishes a little towards his
in the day they sat down to eat, and the food prepared was quite
he did it to warm his hands because they were so cold.  Later on
them.  When the Satyr asked the reason for this, he told him that
they talked, the Man put his fingers to his mouth and blew on
alliance being formed between them.  One very cold wintry day, as
A MAN and a Satyr once drank together in token of a bond of
The Man and the Satyr 
Fox gobbled them up.  
the bottom of the tree.  There, in the sight of the Eagle, the
and helpless, were roasted in their nest and dropped down dead at
fanned the spark into a flame, and the eaglets, as yet unfledged
along with a burning cinder, to her nest.  A strong breeze soon
a goat, she suddenly seized a piece of the flesh, and carried it,
hovering near an altar, on which some villagers were sacrificing
retribution, however, quickly fell upon the Eagle.  While
of her young than for her inability to avenge them.  A just
discovered what had happened, but was less grieved for the death
cubs, and feasted herself and her brood.  The Fox on her return,
swooped down while the Fox was out, seized upon one of the little
plan, the Eagle, being in want of provision for her young ones,
produced her young.  Not long after they had agreed upon this
of a tall tree, while the Fox crept into the underwood and there
live near each other.  The Eagle built her nest in the branches
AN EAGLE and a Fox formed an intimate friendship and decided to
The Eagle and the Fox 
and expelled him from the mansions of Olympus.  
such inveterate faultfinding, drove him from his office of judge,
remove if a neighbor proved unpleasant.  Jupiter, indignant at
foundation of her house, so its inhabitants might more easily
Minerva because she had not contrived iron wheels in the
against the intended mischief.  And, lastly, he inveighed against
might read the thoughts of the evil disposed and take precautions
he had not placed the heart of man on the outside, that everyone
where to strike.  He then condemned the work of Jupiter, because
the horns of the bull below his eyes, so he might better see
all.  He first blamed the work of Neptune because he had not made
being very envious of the handicraft of each, found fault with
Momus as judge, and to abide by his decision.  Momus, however,
to which had made the most perfect work.  They agreed to appoint
Minerva.  On the completion of their labors, a dispute arose as
Jupiter, the first bull by Neptune, and the first house by
ACCORDING to an ancient legend, the first man was made by
Jupiter, Neptune, Minerva, and Momus 
own hospitality.   
taste it, met with a fitting requital, after the fashion of her
and enjoy its contents at his leisure.  The Fox, unable even to
with a long narrow mouth, so that he could easily insert his neck
turn, asked the Fox to sup with him, and set before her a flagon
able to eat afforded the Fox much amusement.  The Crane, in his
of the Crane at every mouthful, and his vexation at not being
into a broad flat stone dish.  The soup fell out of the long bill
entertainment but some soup made of pulse, which was poured out
A FOX invited a Crane to supper and provided nothing for his
The Fox and the Crane 
knowledge he is a Daw; but he would like you to think an Eagle."
"Father, what kind of bird is it?'  he replied, "To my certain
him home at night, gave him to his children.  On their saying,
caught him.  He at once clipped the Jackdaw's wings, and taking
as he could.  The shepherd, seeing what had happened, ran up and
release himself, although he fluttered with his feathers as much
became entangled in the ram's fleece and he was not able to
large ram, with the intention of carrying him off, but his claws
flew around with a great whir of his wings and settled upon a
determined to emulate the strength and flight of the Eagle.  He
witnessed the capture of the lamb, was stirred with envy and
a lamb and carried him aloft in his talons.  A Jackdaw, who
AN EAGLE, flying down from his perch on a lofty rock, seized upon
The Eagle and the Jackdaw 
recover for him the axe he had thrown into the pool.  
knavery, not only took away the golden axe, but refused to
very same axe that he had lost.  Mercury, displeased at his
Workman seized it greedily, and declared that truly it was the
brought up a golden axe, inquiring if he had lost it.  The
learned the cause of his grief, plunged into the stream and
Mercury appeared to him just as he hoped he would; and having
the pool at the same place, and sat down on the bank to weep. 
himself.  He ran to the river and threw his axe on purpose into
them at once resolved to try and secure the same good fortune for
house, related to his companions all that had happened.  One of
axes in addition to his own.    The Workman, on his return to his
Mercury, pleased with his honesty, gave him the golden and silver
The Workman claimed it and expressed his joy at its recovery. 
for the third time and brought up the axe that had been lost. 
his.  When the Workman said it was not, he dived into the pool
silver axe in his hand, and again asked the Workman if it were
disappeared beneath the water a second time, returned with a
one he had lost.  On his saying that it was not his, Mercury
stream, and, bringing up a golden axe, inquired if that were the
After he told him his misfortune, Mercury plunged into the
fate.  Mercury appeared and demanded the cause of his tears. 
of his livelihood, he sat down on the bank and lamented his hard
- by accident into a deep pool.  Being thus deprived of the means
A WORKMAN, felling wood by the side of a river, let his axe drop
Mercury and the Workmen 
seeing them shut up in this prison-house."  
the number of your family, the greater your cause of sorrow, in
good friend, cease from this unseasonable boasting.  The larger
young ones which she had hatched.  A Crow hearing her, said:  "My
A DOVE shut up in a cage was boasting of the large number of
The Dove and the Crow 
who are able to discern them.  
alike to all, but singly, and separately; and one by one to those
singly:  while the Goods proceed from Jupiter, and are given, not
for they come not one by one, but in troops, and by no means
enter the habitations of men.  Hence it arises that Ills abound,
company with each other, but that the Goods should one by one
and decreed that henceforth the Ills should visit the earth in
down for their future protection.  Jupiter granted their request
unceasing warfare; and that an indissoluble law might be laid
in common and could not live together, but were engaged in
might no longer be associated with the Ills, as they had nothing
vengeance on their persecutors.  They entreated Jupiter that they
The Goods wafted themselves to heaven and asked for a righteous
by reason of their numbers had prevailed to possess the earth. 
share which they each had in the affairs of mankind; for the Ills
ALL the Goods were once driven out by the Ills from that common
The Goods and the Ills 
destruction."  
you like, whenever it happens to me, brings with it my inevitable
shoulders."  "Woe's me!"  said the flea; "this very patting which
loved and well cared for by men, and they often pat my head and
stint?'  The Ox replied:  "I do not wish to be ungrateful, for I am
mercilessly feed on their flesh and drink their blood without
slave for them day by day, while I, being so small a creature,
and strong, you submit to the wrongs you receive from men and
A FLEA thus questioned an Ox:  "What ails you, that being so huge
The Flea and the Ox 
similar misfortune."  
safe, exulted over my calamity, have now reason to deplore a
expiring said, "Ah! you who so lately, when you supposed yourself
and killed him.  The Hare was comforted in her death, and
While the Sparrow was thus speaking, a hawk suddenly seized him
is thy remarkable swiftness of foot? Why were your feet so slow?"
cries like a child.  A Sparrow upbraided her and said, "Where now
A HARE pounced upon by an eagle sobbed very much and uttered
The Sparrow and the Hare 
myself, if I had not heard your bray."  
voice than he exclaimed, "I might possibly have been frightened
frighten him also, but the Fox no sooner heard the sound of his
in his wanderings.  At last coming upon a Fox, he tried to
and amused himself by frightening all the foolish animals he met
AN ASS, having put on the Lion's skin, roamed about in the forest
The Ass in the Lion's Skin 
fight yourself, your trumpet stirs all the others to battle."  
you should be put to death," they said; "for, while you do not
but this one brass trumpet."  "That is the very reason for which
a single man of your troop.  I have no arms, and carry nothing
take my life without cause or without inquiry.  I have not slain
enemy.  He cried out to his captors, "Pray spare me, and do not
A TRUMPETER, bravely leading on the soldiers, was captured by the
The Trumpeter Taken Prisoner 
their past folly.  
while she no longer gives them advice, but in solitude laments
that when she appears they look to her as knowing all things,
knowledge and deemed her to be the wisest of birds.  Hence it is
afterwards, finding her words were true, they wondered at her
the Owl to be beside herself and said that she was mad.  But
The Birds gave no credence to these warning words, but considered
which would fly faster than the wings of the Birds themselves. 
this man, being on foot, would contrive darts armed with feathers
And, lastly, the Owl, seeing an archer approach, predicted that
men had sown, as it was a plant which boded no good to them. 
The Owl next advised them to pluck up the seed of the flax, which
lime, would be extracted and by which they would be captured. 
from which an irremediable poison, the bird- 
not allow it to grow.  She said acorns would produce mistletoe,
first began to sprout, to pull it all up out of the ground and
AN OWL, in her wisdom, counseled the Birds that when the acorn
The Owl and the Birds 
who revilest me; but this mischance which has befallen me."  
bitterly reviled him.  The Lion said to the Fox, "It is not thou
A FOX saw a Lion confined in a cage, and standing near him,
The Fox and the Lion 
destruction also."  
you have not only killed yourself, but you have wrought my
bird! what have you done? By thus appearing before the springtime
unfortunate Swallow lifeless on the ground, he said, "Unhappy
set in again with renewed frost and cold.  When he found the
come, and went and sold his cloak.  Not many days later, winter
along a pool and twittering gaily.  He supposed that summer had
to see a Swallow, which had appeared before its season, skimming
patrimony and had but one good cloak left.  One day he happened
A YOUNG MAN, a great spendthrift, had run through all his
The Spendthrift and the Swallow 
at night.  
concealed himself in dark hiding-places, flying always alone and
he was driven forth from the light of day, and henceforth
combatants.  Therefore being condemned by each for his treachery,
peace was proclaimed, his deceitful conduct was apparent to both
always fought on the side which he felt was the strongest.  When
conquerors.  A Bat, fearing the uncertain issues of the fight,
THE BIRDS waged war with the Beasts, and each were by turns the
The Birds, the Beasts, and the Bat 
destruction."  
me! this overestimation of myself is the cause of my
killed him.  He exclaimed with a too late repentance, "Wretched
indulging in these proud thoughts, a Lion fell upon him and
acknowledged as King of all the collected beasts?'  While he was
an acre in length, be afraid of the Lion? Ought I not to be
"Why should I, being of such an immense size and extending nearly
become greatly extended and magnified, and he said to himself,
ROAMING BY the mountainside at sundown, a Wolf saw his own shadow
The Wolf and the Lion 
accommodate him.  
nor a necessary work to make himself such a house as would
great size.  Now he considered that it would be neither an easy
stretched at his full length and appeared to himself to be of a
house.  However when the summer returned again, he lay asleep
possible on account of the cold, determined to make himself a
IN THE WINTERTIME, a Dog curled up in as small a space as
The Dog's House 
ill, but to good, will."  
him, said with a smile, "You should have moved your master not to
Wolf was at once taken and flayed; whereon the Fox, turning to
flay a wolf alive and wrap his skin yet warm around you."  The
him immediately to tell him the cure, when he replied, "You must
from the physicians the means of healing you?'  The Lion commanded
place to place in every direction, and have sought and learnt
to you have benefited you so much as I, who have traveled from
to defend himself and said, "And who of all those who have come
roaring out in a rage against him, the Fox sought an opportunity
Fox came in and heard these last words of the Wolf.  The Lion
them all and of not coming to visit him.  At that very moment the
the Lion of not paying any respect to him who had the rule over
thinking that he had a capital opportunity, accused the Fox to
to visit their king, except the Fox.  The Wolf therefore,
A LION, growing old, lay sick in his cave.  All the beasts came
The Lion, the Wolf, and the Fox 
are unable to heal your own lame gait and wrinkled skin?'  
asked him, "How can you pretend to prescribe for others, when you
skilled in the use of drugs and able to heal all diseases.  A Fox
proclaimed to all the beasts that he was a learned physician,
A FROG once upon a time came forth from his home in the marsh and
The Quack Frog 
refrain from quarreling with each other."  
struck at by these Gamecocks, when I see that they cannot even
said to himself, "I shall no longer distress myself at being
and not separating before one had well beaten the other.  He then
stranger.  Not long afterwards he saw the Cocks fighting together
supposed that he was thus evilly treated because he was a
about, so that the Partridge became grievously troubled and
put into the poultry-yard, they struck at it and followed it
it home to be reared with his Gamecocks.  When the Partridge was
he found a tame Partridge for sale.  He purchased it and brought
A MAN had two Gamecocks in his poultry-yard.  One day by chance
The Gamecocks and the Partridge 
me."  
not be grievous to me, if I could only see my Enemy die before
that he supposed it would be the prow, the Man said, "Death would
the two ends of the ship would go down first.  On his replying
of sinking, the one in the stern inquired of the pilot which of
ship.  A violent storm arose, and with the vessel in great danger
seated himself in the stem, and the other in the prow of the
vessel.  Determined to keep as far apart as possible, the one
TWO MEN, deadly enemies to each other, were sailing in the same
The Two Men Who Were Enemies 
Persuasion is better than Force.  
his path.  
overcome with heat, undressed and bathed in a stream that lay in
than he took off one garment after another, and at last, fairly
with all his warmth.  The Traveler no sooner felt his genial rays
upon the Sun to see what he could do.  The Sun suddenly shone out
until at last, resigning all hope of victory, the Wind called
his blasts, the closer the Traveler wrapped his cloak around him,
first tried his power and blew with all his might, but the keener
could first strip a wayfaring man of his clothes.  The North Wind
powerful, and agreed that he should be declared the victor who
THE NORTH WIND and the Sun disputed as to which was the most
The North Wind and the Sun 
thee, who hast disowned and wronged thy former patron?'  
and said to him, "O thou most base fellow? how can I believe
promise to offer frankincense to Mercury.  Mercury soon appeared
again caught in a snare, he passed by Apollo and made the same
from his danger, he forgot his promise.  Shortly afterwards,
a vow to offer some frankincense at his shrine.  But when rescued
A CROW caught in a snare prayed to Apollo to release him, making
The Crow and Mercury 
for me to give the water to them than to you."  
making any promises, do all these things.  It is surely better
interrupted them, saying:  "I have already two oxen, who, without
guard and drive off thieves with their stings.  But the Farmer
them produce finer grapes.  The Wasps said that they would keep
Partridges declared that they would dig around his vines and make
promised amply to repay him the favor which they asked.  The
Farmer and besought him to give them some water to drink.  They
THE WASPS and the Partridges, overcome with thirst, came to a
The Wasps, the Partridges, and the Farmer 
your lack of beauty by your virtues."  
by evil conduct; and you, my daughter, that you may make up for
mirror every day:  you, my son, that you may not spoil your beauty
impartially on each, said, "I wish you both would look into the
embraced them both, and bestowing his kisses and affection
made use of that which belonged only to girls.  The father
on her Brother, and spitefully accused him of having, as a boy,
reflection on herself.  She ran off to her father.  to be avenged
interpreting all he said (and how could she do otherwise?) into
grew angry, and could not bear the self-praises of her Brother,
chair.  The boy congratulated himself on his good looks; the girl
look together into a mirror that was placed on their mother's
they were playing one day as children, they happened by chance to
his good looks, the latter for her extraordinary ugliness.  While
A FATHER had one son and one daughter, the former remarkable for
The Brother and the Sister 
get credit for it.  
Men of evil reputation, when they perform a good deed, fail to
never have indulged your ears at the cost of your belly."  
Horse replied, "If oats had been the food of wolves, you would
are a friend whom I would love to hear enjoying good eating."  The
full of fine oats, which I have left untouched for you, as you
addressed him:  "I would advise you to go into that field.  It is
A WOLF coming out of a field of oats met a Horse and thus
The Wolf and the Horse 
whom no one could employ to make even the shoes for their feet."
guilty? You have not hesitated to entrust your heads to a man,
assembly and addressed the citizens:  "Of what folly have you been
stupid clamors of the crowd.  The Governor then called a public
he had no knowledge of medicine, and was only made famous by the
a reward.  The Cobbler, under the fear of death, confessed that
Cobbler's antidote, commanding him to drink it on the promise of
while filling it with water, pretended to mix poison with the
to test his skill.  For this purpose he called for a cup, and
himself of a serious illness, the Governor of the town determined
puffs and advertisements.  When the Cobbler happened to fall sick
all poisons, and obtained a great name for himself by long-winded
not known.  He sold a drug, pretending that it was an antidote to
by poverty, began to practice medicine in a town in which he was
A COBBLER unable to make a living by his trade and made desperate
The Cobbler Turned Doctor 
It is easy to kick a man that is down.  
your teeth."  
alive, you would soon find out that his claws were stronger than
with their teeth.  A Fox, seeing them, said, "If this lion were
SOME DOGS, finding the skin of a lion, began to tear it in pieces
The Dogs and the Fox 
Evil tendencies are shown in early life.  
sheepfold."  
I know full well.  It would not be safe to admit him to the
whether it is the cub of a Fox, or the whelp of a Wolf, but this
He felt it, and being in doubt, said:  "I do not quite know
him, with a request that he would feel it, and say what it was. 
touching them with his hands.  The whelp of a Wolf was brought
A BLIND MAN was accustomed to distinguishing different animals by
The Blind Man and the Whelp 
slower of flight and heavier in their bodies, were captured.  
light of wing, fled away at his approach; while the Geese, being
birdcatcher came to ensnare them in his nets.  The Cranes, being
THE GEESE and the Cranes were feeding in the same meadow, when a
The Geese and the Cranes 
head! Yet it is of no value, as it entirely lacks brains."  
human head.  He placed his paws on it and said, "What a beautiful
his properties, came upon a Mask, an admirable imitation of a
A FOX entered the house of an actor and, rummaging through all
The Fox and the Mask 
reduced to the condition you so lately treated with contempt?'  
boaster, are now all thy gay trappings, thou who are thyself
Ass, seeing him drawing a dungcart, thus derided him:  "Where, O
become broken-winded, was sent by his owner to the farm.  The
the justice of the gods.  Not long afterwards the Horse, having
heels."  The Ass held his peace, and made only a silent appeal to
"Hardly," said the Horse, "can I resist kicking you with my
The Ass, being heavily laden, moved slowly out of the way. 
A HORSE, proud of his fine trappings, met an Ass on the highway. 
The Horse and the Ass 
into the snares of death."  
while I purposed to hunt another, I am myself fallen unawares
falling into a swoon, the man said to himself, "Woe is me! that
before his feet.  The Viper, turning about, stung him, and
looking upwards, he unknowingly trod upon a Viper asleep just
having his whole thoughts directed towards the sky.  While thus
it, and fitting his twigs to a proper length, watched intently,
birds.  Seeing a thrush sitting upon a tree, he wished to take
A FOWLER, taking his bird-lime and his twigs, went out to catch
The Fowler and the Viper 
Union is strength.  
leisure.  
fear as they fed alone, and feasted on them one by one at his own
speeches succeeded in separating them, he attacked them without
attack them while they kept together.  Having at last by guileful
ambush in the hope of making them his prey, but was afraid to
THREE BULLS for a long time pastured together.  A Lion lay in
The Lion and the Three Bulls 
should next have something to make us sad."  
only to be looked for that we, who just now were over-rejoiced,
seems to me, sorrow is always the twin sister of joy; and it was
an old man, said, "Let us cease lamenting, my mates, for, as it
formed such very different expectations.  One of their company,
disappointment which had befallen them, but because they had
stones, and the men were beyond measure cast downso much at the
shore they found but few fish:  the nets were full of sand and
had taken a large catch.  When they had dragged the nets to the
be very heavy, they danced about for joy and supposed that they
SOME FISHERMEN were out trawling their nets.  Perceiving them to
The Fishermen 
for I know well when to go fast, and when to go slow."  
me back with the reins.  Away, therefore, with your insolence,
sits above you, and who quickens my pace with his whip, or holds
replied, "I do not heed your threats; I only care for him who
See if I do not prick your neck with my sting."  The Draught-Mule
Draught-Mule said, "How slow you are! Why do you not go faster?
A FLY sat on the axle-tree of a chariot, and addressing the
The Fly and the Draught-Mule 
The dishonest, if they act honestly, get no credit.  
deny."  
and I do believe you, Fox, to have stolen what you so stoutly
sentence:  "I do not think you, Wolf, ever lost what you claim;
When each had fully stated his case the Ape announced this
charge.  An Ape undertook to adjudge the matter between them. 
A WOLF accused a Fox of theft, but the Fox entirely denied the
The Wolf, the Fox, and the Ape 
safety, and without fear."  
plowlands and roots from the hedgerow, where I can live in
surrounded by too many dangers to please me.  I prefer my bare
feast, I must leave you to enjoy it by yourself.  It is
to his friend:  "Although you have prepared for me so dainty a
hid themselves.  At last the Country Mouse, almost famished, said
whereupon the two Mice, more frightened than before, ran away and
someone else entered to take something out of a cupboard,
squeezing.  They had scarcely begun their repast again when
could, to a hole so narrow that two could only find room in it by
opened the door, and they both ran off squeaking, as fast as they
own hard fate.  Just as they were beginning to eat, someone
cheer, expressed his satisfaction in warm terms and lamented his
Country Mouse, being much delighted at the sight of such good
last of all, brought a dainty piece of cheese from a basket.  The
before him bread, barley, beans, dried figs, honey, raisins, and,
to town with his friend.  On his arrival, the Town Mouse placed
dainties."  The Country Mouse was easily persuaded, and returned
with me, as I wish you would, you shall have an ample share of my
plenty.  I am surrounded by every luxury, and if you will come
here the life of the ants, while in my house is the horn of
from the hedgerow, the Town Mouse said to his friend, "You live
bare plowlands, eating there wheat-stocks and roots pulled up
him a visit and partake of his country fare.  As they were on the
A COUNTRY MOUSE invited a Town Mouse, an intimate friend, to pay
The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse 
killed the Goat, and so healed the Ass.  
bade him pour upon the wounds the lungs of a Goat.  They at once
bruised.  His master, sending for a leech, asked his advice.  He
listened to his words, and falling into a ditch, was very much
be epileptic and fall into a ditch and so obtain rest.  The Ass
carrying heavy burdens"; and he further advised him to pretend to
you are treated:  at one time grinding in the mill, and at another
account of his greater abundance of food, said, "How shamefully
A MAN once kept a Goat and an Ass.  The Goat, envying the Ass on
The Goat and the Ass 
do see very plainly every preparation for your dining on a bull."
indication whatever of your having slaughtered a sheep, while I
for offense.  "I have reasons enough," said the Bull.  "I see no
a word of salutation to his host, who had not given him any cause
departure.  The Lion inquired why he went off so abruptly without
of the sheep, and, without saying a word, quietly took his
den, saw the huge spits and giant caldrons, and no sign whatever
and make his meal on him.  The Bull, on approaching the Lion's
the act of reclining to eat, he might attack him to advantage,
company."  The Lion said this in the hope that, as the Bull was in
partake of him with me, I shall be delighted to have your
slain a fine sheep, my friend; and if you will come home and
ensure his destruction.  He approached the Bull and said, "I have
attack him on account of his great size, resorted to a trick to
A LION, greatly desiring to capture a Bull, and yet afraid to
The Lion and the Bull 
yourself, who are in want of food."  
friend, it is not for the pasture that you invite me, but for
and that the herbage was most tender.  She replied, "No, my
mishap; and he added that the meadows lay where he was standing,
earnestly begged her to come lower down, lest she fall by some
where he had no chance of reaching her.  He called to her and
A WOLF saw a Goat feeding at the summit of a steep precipice,
The Wolf and the Goat 
him, and tore him to pieces.  
When the Fox approached the tree, the Dog sprang out and caught
waking my porter, so that he may open the door and let you in."
do me the favor of going around to the hollow trunk below me, and
The Cock, suspecting his civilities, said:  "Sir, I wish you would
make the acquaintance of the owner of so magnificent a voice. 
and stood under the branches, saying how earnestly he desired to
Fox heard the sound, and wishing to make a breakfast on him, came
dawned, the Cock, as usual, crowed very loudly several times.  A
found a bed beneath in the hollow trunk.  When the morning
up, perched himself on the branches of a tree, while the Dog
At nightfall they took shelter in a thick wood.  The Cock flying
A DOG and a Cock being great friends, agreed to travel together. 
The Dog, the Cock, and the Fox 
are not yet even within sight."  
go food ready in my hand, for the sake of pursuing birds which
him, said:  "I should indeed have lost my senses if I should let
food, ought to pursue the larger birds.  The Hawk, interrupting
big enough to satisfy the hunger of a Hawk who, if he wanted
earnestly begged the Hawk to let him go, saying that he was not
down and seized him.  The Nightingale, about to lose his life,
his wont, was seen by a Hawk who, being in need of food, swooped
A NIGHTINGALE, sitting aloft upon an oak and singing according to
The Hawk and the Nightingale 
with the endowments allotted to them."  
and to the crow, unfavorable auguries.  These are all contented 
strength; to the nightingale, song; to the raven, favorable, 
assigned by the will of the Fates--to thee, beauty; to the eagle, 
surpassed in song?'   "The lot of each," replied Juno, "has been
purpose have I," said the bird, "this dumb beauty so long as I am
unfold a tail gorgeous with painted plumage."  "But for what
in size.  The splendor of the emerald shines in your neck and you
Goddess, to console him, said, "But you far excel in beauty and
mouth than he became a laughingstock to all who heard him.  The
pleased every ear with his song, he himself no sooner opened his
THE PEACOCK made complaint to Juno that, while the nightingale
The Peacock and Juno 
Straws show how the wind blows.  
by those with whom you passed the whole day!"  
return late in the evening, what must have been felt towards you
those who go out early in the morning with their flocks and
looks of aversion."  He said, "O Wife, if you were disliked by
treated her, she replied, "The herdsmen and shepherds cast on me
and when he inquired how she had got on and how the servants had
home on a visit to her father.  After a short time she returned,
persons in her father's house, he made some excuse to send her
household.  Wishing to find out if she had the same effect on the
A MAN had a Wife who made herself hated by all the members of his
The Man and His Wife 
"The Grapes are sour, and not ripe as I thought."  
At last she turned away, hiding her disappointment and saying:
them, but wearied herself in vain, for she could not reach them. 
from a trellised vine.  She resorted to all her tricks to get at
A FAMISHED FOX saw some clusters of ripe black grapes hanging
The Fox and the Grapes 
very slowly."  
in need of immediate help, and he is wont to give his good gifts
enjoy the good things he has to give?'  "Why," he replied, "I am
sell him, being such a one as you describe, when you may yourself
One of the bystanders said to him, "My good fellow, why do you
of a benefactor who bestowed wealth and helped to heap up riches. 
attract purchasers, he cried out that he had the statue to sell
sale.  When no one appeared willing to buy it, in order to
A CERTAIN MAN made a wooden image of Mercury and offered it for
The Seller of Images 
healing, when my father only taught me the trade of a butcher?'  
said, "I am rightly served, for why did I attempt the art of
mouth and galloped away.  The Wolf, being thus fearfully mauled,
thorn, when the Ass, with his heels, kicked his teeth into his
foot, and was giving his whole mind to the discovery of the
should injure his throat.  The Wolf consented and lifted up the
requested that the Wolf pull it out, lest when he ate him it
through a hedge he had trod with his foot upon a sharp thorn.  He
inquired the cause of his lameness.  The Ass replied that passing
and immediately pretended to be lame.  The Wolf, coming up,
AN ASS feeding in a meadow saw a Wolf approaching to seize him,
The Ass and the Wolf 
Counsel without help is useless.  
help me now and scold me afterwards."  
the boy for his imprudence.  "Oh, sir!"  cried the youth, "pray
out a helping hand, the man stood by unconcernedly, and scolded
called out to a passing traveler for help, but instead of holding
A BOY bathing in a river was in danger of being drowned.  He
The Boy Bathing 
just in the same proportion as you are what you pretend to be!"  
his crafty foe and said, "Ah! you that lie there, may you prosper
many a trap and snare, observed from a safe distance the trick of
and still others after them.  A very old Mouse, who had escaped
death.  Another perished in a similar manner, and then a third,
food, leaped upon him, and was instantly caught and squeezed to
and lay down in a dark corner.  A Mouse, supposing him to be
catch mice as he once did.  He therefore rolled himself in flour
A WEASEL, inactive from age and infirmities, was not able to
The Weasel and the Mice 
Acquaintance softens prejudices.  
him.  
that he went up to him and commenced a familiar conversation with
first.  On seeing him the third time, he so increased in boldness
time, he was still much alarmed, but not to the same extent as at
that he nearly died with fear.  On meeting him for the second
chance for the first time in the forest, he was so frightened
WHEN A FOX who had never yet seen a Lion, fell in with him by
The Fox and the Lion 
Self-help is the best help.  
trusts his friends, but will reap the field himself."  
little ones, for the man is in earnest this time; he no longer
these words said to her brood, "It is time now to be off, my
as I can hire, and will get in the harvest."  The Lark on hearing
come myself tomorrow with my laborers, and with as many reapers
shedding the grain from excess of ripeness.  He said, "I will
of the field came again a few days later and saw the wheat
to help him with his harvest is not really in earnest."  The owner
yet, my son," she replied; "the man who only sends to his friends
place they should move for safety.  "There is no occasion to move
speech and related it to his mother, inquiring of her to what
to help me with my harvest."  One of the young Larks heard his
crop, said, "The time has come when I must ask all my neighbors
feathers, when the owner of the field, looking over his ripe
attained the use of their wings and the full plumage of their
wheat.  The brood had almost grown to their full strength and
A LARK had made her nest in the early spring on the young green
The Lark and Her Young Ones 
good; but they lack both claws and teeth such as we have."  
equal.  The Lions made this reply:  "Your words, O Hares! are
THE HARES harangued the assembly, and argued that all should be
The Hares and the Lions 
trust my sheep to a Wolf?'  
destroyed, he exclaimed:  "I have been rightly served; why did I
of the flock.  When the Shepherd returned to find his flock
opportunity, fell upon the sheep, and destroyed the greater part
entirely in his charge.  The Wolf, now that he had the
when occasion called him one day into the city, he left the sheep
of his flock rather than as a plotter of evil against it; and
to seize them, the Shepherd began to look upon him as a guardian
in the company of the sheep and did not make the slightest effort
watch over his movements.  But when the Wolf, day after day, kept
his guard against him, as against an enemy, and kept a strict
attempt to injure one of them.  The Shepherd at first stood on
A WOLF followed a flock of sheep for a long time and did not
The Wolf and the Shepherd 
over to the teeth and claws of his companions.  
The King of the Apes, enraged at hearing these truths, gave him
these thy companions after thy example are excellent Apes too."
seem to you?'  "Thou art," he said, "a most excellent Ape, and all
turned to him.  "And pray how do I and these my friends around me
if, according to my custom, I tell the truth?'  The Ape quickly
reward be given for a lie, with what gift may not I be rewarded,
On this the truthful Traveler thought to himself, "If so great a
lie, commanded that a handsome present be given to the flatterer. 
leaders of armies."  The Ape and all his court, gratified with the
companions of yourself, fit at least to be ambassadors and
you see around me?'  "These," he made answer, "are worthy
to me a most mighty king."  "And what is your estimate of those
to you to be, O strangers?'  The Lying Traveler replied, "You seem
greeted them with this salutation:  "What sort of a king do I seem
signified that the two men should be brought before him, and
as was the custom among men.  After these preparations he
right hand and on his left, and that a throne be placed for him,
same time that all the Apes be arranged in a long row on his
might know what was said of him among men.  He ordered at the
king, commanded them to be seized and brought before him, that he
the land of Apes.  One of the Apes, who had raised himself to be
nothing but lies, were traveling together and by chance came to
TWO MEN, one who always spoke the truth and the other who told
The Apes and the Two Travelers 
necessities.  
to all who do not administer to his comfort or to his
tolerant only of his own household, but averse to strangers and
is often snappish, irritable, hard to please, and selfish,
The end of life was reserved for the Dog, wherefore the old man
labor, and resolute to amass wealth and to husband his resources. 
and therefore man in his middle age is fond of work, devoted to
opinion.  The Ox took under his patronage the next term of life,
impetuous, headstrong, and obstinate in maintaining his own
gave them his own attributes:  hence every man is in his youth
characterized himself.  The Horse chose his earliest years and
endowed one portion of it with the qualities which chiefly
purpose, they divided the term of his life between them, and each
determined to repay him to the best of their ability.  For this
meat from his own table.  Grateful for these favors, the animals
his oats, gave the Ox an abundance of hay, and fed the Dog with
lighted a fire, and warmed them.  He let the Horse make free with
shelter and protection from Man.  He received them kindly,
A HORSE, Ox, and Dog, driven to great straits by the cold, sought
The Man, the Horse, the Ox, and the Dog 
accomplish for your own benefit, and for my master's injury."  
unexpected favors to myself, you have some private ends to
your hands will only make me more watchful, lest under these
my mouth, you will be greatly mistaken.  This sudden kindness at
threw him the pieces of meat, the Dog said, "If you think to stop
that he would not alarm his master by barking.  As the Thief
him several slices of meat in order to pacify the Housedog, so
A THIEF came in the night to break into a house.  He brought with
The Thief and the Housedog 
A false tale often betrays itself.  
of your ancestors will be able to contradict you."  
a most appropriate subject for your falsehoods, as I am sure none
and citizens of great renown."  The Fox replied, "You have chosen
erected in honor of my ancestors, who were in their day freedmen
"All these monuments which you see," said the Monkey, "are
they journeyed, they passed through a cemetery full of monuments. 
A FOX and a Monkey were traveling together on the same road.  As
The Fox and the Monkey 
the fortunes of others; how is it you did not foresee your own?'  
running and said, "Oh! you fellow there! you say you can foretell
hastened away as fast as he could run.  A neighbor saw him
and that all his goods were being stolen.  He sighed heavily and
announced to him that the doors of his house had been broken open
the passers-by when a person ran up in great haste, and
A WIZARD, sitting in the marketplace, was telling the fortunes of
The Prophet 
turned piper to please you."  
what I deserve; for I, who am only a butcher, should not have
began chasing the Wolf.  Turning to the Kid, he said, "It is just
and the Kid was dancing, some hounds hearing the sound ran up and
which I may dance."  The Wolf complied, and while he was piping
I die I would ask of you one favor you will play me a tune to
said:  "I know, friend Wolf, that I must be your prey, but before
by a Wolf.  Seeing he could not escape, he turned round, and
A KID, returning without protection from the pasture, was pursued
The Kid and the Wolf 
had enslaved himself to the service of man.  
hour he found that instead of obtaining revenge on the Stag, he
The Horse consented and allowed the man to mount him.  From that
carry him, he would contrive effective weapons against the Stag. 
that if the Horse would receive a bit in his mouth and agree to
were willing to help him in punishing the Stag.  The man replied
desiring to revenge himself on the stranger, asked a man if he
Stag intruded into his domain and shared his pasture.  The Horse,
AT ONE TIME the Horse had the plain entirely to himself.  Then a
The Horse and the Stag 
So desiring two ends, he obtained neither.  
him on account of his color.  expelled him from living with them. 
Doves, he returned to the Jackdaws.  They too, not recognizing
pecking him with their beaks.  Failing to obtain food among the
chatter, they discovered his true character and drove him forth,
their cote.  But when one day he forgot himself and began to
silent, supposed him to be one of themselves and admitted him to
their plentiful maintenance.  The Doves, as long as he was
food, painted himself white and joined them in order to share
A JACKDAW, seeing some Doves in a cote abundantly provided with
The Jackdaw and the Doves 
under the water and drowned him.  
The Dolphin, indignant at these falsehoods, dipped the Monkey
that he knew him very well and that he was an intimate friend. 
of Athens).  Supposing that a man was meant, the Monkey answered
Dolphin then inquired if he knew the Piraeus (the famous harbor
descended from one of the most noble families in that city.  The
Athenian.  The latter replied that he was, and that he was
land not far from Athens, he asked the Monkey if he were an
the shore.  When the Dolphin arrived with his burden in sight of
placed himself under him, to convey him on his back in safety to
him to be a man (whom he is always said to befriend), came and
Dolphin saw the Monkey contending with the waves, and supposing
Monkey, and all the crew were obliged to swim for their lives.  A
violent tempest arose in which the ship was wrecked and he, his
him while on shipboard.  As he sailed off the coast of Greece, a
A SAILOR, bound on a long voyage, took with him a Monkey to amuse
The Monkey and the Dolphin 
myself from this spider, the most inconsiderable of insects!"  
wage war successfully with the hugest beasts, should perish
He greatly lamented his fate, saying, "Woe is me! that I, who can
entangled in the meshes of a cobweb and was eaten by a spider. 
song of triumph, flew away.  But shortly afterwards he became
The Gnat thus prevailed over the Lion, and, buzzing about in a
tore himself with his claws, until he punished himself severely. 
of the face devoid of hair.  While trying to crush him, the Lion
himself upon the Lion and stung him on the nostrils and the parts
will conquer."  The Gnat, having sounded his horn, fastened
powerful than you; and if you doubt it, let us fight and see who
an a woman in her quarrels.  I repeat that I am altogether more
consist? You can scratch with your claws and bite with your teeth
nor are you stronger than I am.  For in what does your strength
A GNAT came and said to a Lion, "I do not in the least fear you,
The Gnat and the Lion 
should repay me with these painful requitals!"  
exclaimed, "O wretched me! that those whom I cheer with my fruit
branches with stones and sticks.  The Walnut-Tree piteously
fruit.  For the sake of the nuts, the passers-by broke its
A WALNUT TREE standing by the roadside bore an abundant crop of
The Walnut-Tree 
definitely a wolf."  
size of a lion among wolves, in a herd of lions you are
do in your pride and self-conceit; for even though you have the
seeing this, said, "May I never make myself so ridiculous as you
own race, consorted exclusively with the lions.  An old sly Fox,
thought that they gave him this name in earnest, and, leaving his
The Wolf, with a lack of sense proportioned to his enormous size,
swiftness, so that they unanimously decided to call him "Lion."
wolves, who exceeded all his fellow-wolves in strength, size, and
AT ONE TIME a very large and strong Wolf was born among the
The Wolf and the Fox 
A willful man will have his way to his own hurt.  
wheels.  
passed through the gully and crushed him to death under its
had become accustomed.  A few days afterwards a heavy wagon
saying that he felt it so very hard to leave a place to which he
safety from danger and more abundant food.  The other refused,
him to come and live with him, saying that he would enjoy greater
the pond warned his friend to change his residence and entreated
water, and traversed by a country road.  The Frog that lived in
from public view; the other lived in a gully containing little
TWO FROGS were neighbors.  One inhabited a deep pond, far removed
The Two Frogs 
Necessity is the mother of invention.  
water within his reach and thus saved his life.  
one by one with his beak into the pitcher, until he brought the
he collected as many stones as he could carry and dropped them
of to reach the water, but all his efforts were in vain.  At last
could not possibly get at it.  He tried everything he could think
discovered to his grief that it contained so little water that he
water, flew to it with delight.  When he reached it, he
A CROW perishing with thirst saw a pitcher, and hoping to find
The Crow and the Pitcher 
it aloft.  
his wing, and, seizing the drinking horn in his talons, carried
danger, was about to drink, when the Eagle struck his hand with
drinking horn of the countryman.  The rustic, ignorant of his
irritated at the escape of his prey, injected his poison into the
the coil of the Serpent and let the Eagle go free.  The Serpent,
strangle the bird.  A countryman saw them, and running up, loosed
conflict.  The Serpent had the advantage, and was about to
A SERPENT and an Eagle were struggling with each other in deadly
The Serpent and the Eagle 
for I should not have maltreated the Vine that saved me."  
The Hart, at the point of death, groaned:  "I am rightly served,
and seeing the Hart, shot an arrow from his bow and struck it. 
huntsmen, attracted by the rustling of the leaves, looked back,
the Hart began to nibble the tendrils of the Vine.  One of the
place of his concealment.  Supposing all danger to have passed,
leaves of a Vine.  The huntsmen, in their haste, overshot the
A HART, hard pressed in the chase, hid himself beneath the large
The Hart and the Vine 
have been only an ass."  
tone:  "I must have made a mistake; my father, after all, could
journey, and feeling very wearied, he exclaimed in a disconsolate
child in speed and spirit."  On the next day, being driven a long
"My father surely was a high-mettled racer, and I am his own
galloped about in a very extravagant manner, and said to himself:
A MULE, frolicsome from lack of work and from too much corn,
The Mule 
Every tale is not to be believed.  
again to the inn.  
for safety.  The Thief made off with the coat and did not return
coat in the Thief's hand and ran as fast as he could into the inn
Innkeeper, frightened lest he should be attacked, left his new
moment he yawned the third time and set up a terrible howl.  The
them to pieces in my fury, when I turn into a wolf."  At the same
saying, "Pray wait, sir, and hold my clothes, or I shall tear
The Thief laid hold of his coat and entreated him to stop,
greatly alarmed and, rising from his seat, attempted to run away. 
Innkeeper.  hearing his tale and believing what he said, became
of yawning and again howled like a wolf, as he had at first.  The
wolf and attack men."  With this speech he commenced a second fit
know, that when I yawn for the third time, I actually turn into a
judgment for my crimes, or for any other cause; but this I do
whether these attacks of howling were inflicted on me as a
pieces.  I know not, sir, when I got this habit of yawning, nor
first let me ask you to hold my clothes, or I shall tear them to
you howl so fearfully?'  "I will tell you," said the Thief, "but
the same time howled like a wolf.  The Innkeeper said, "Why do
the conversation began to flag, the Thief yawned terribly and at
his door.  The Thief sat down beside him and talked with him.  As
Innkeeper dressed in a new and handsome coat and sitting before
reckoning.  When he had waited some days in vain, he saw the
of stealing something which should enable him to pay his
A THIEF hired a room in a tavern and stayed a while in the hope
The Thief and the Innkeeper 
and her kittens.  
perished from hunger, and afforded ample provision for the Cat
her cave.  And thus they both, along with their families,
and the Sow, terrified by the Eagle, did not dare to go out from
the Eagle, full of fear of the Sow, sat still on the branches,
to be afraid, she kept a lookout all through the day.  Meanwhile,
foot and obtained food for herself and her kittens, but feigning
hollow of the tree.  When night came she went forth with silent
fears into the Sow, she went and pretended to hide herself in the
pounce upon one of your little pigs."  Having instilled these
out with your litter to find food, the Eagle is prepared to
said, "Your children are in great danger; for as soon as you go
out of her senses, she crept down to the cave of the Sow, and
families as food for her young."  Having thus frightened the Eagle
earth, wishes to uproot the oak, so she may on its fall seize our
unfortunately.  The Wild Sow, whom you see daily digging up the
and said, "Destruction is preparing for you, and for me too,
To carry out her design, she climbed to the nest of the Eagle,
The Cat cunningly resolved to destroy this chance-made colony. 
a Wild Sow, with her young, took shelter in a hollow at its foot. 
found a convenient hole, moved into the middle of the trunk; and
AN EAGLE made her nest at the top of a lofty oak; a Cat, having
The Eagle, the Cat, and the Wild Sow 
blood I have left."  
more hungry will come in their place, and will drink up all the
and if you rid me of these which are already satiated, others
flies which you see are full of blood, and sting me but little,
not want to be rid of them?'  "No," returned the Fox, "for these
do not molest them."  "How is this?'  said the Hedgehog; "do you
that were tormenting him.  "By no means," replied the Fox; "pray
saw his anguish and inquired if he should drive away the flies
blood-sucking flies settled upon him.  A Hedgehog, passing by,
very much bruised, sick, and unable to move.  A swarm of hungry
the current into a very deep ravine, where he lay for a long time
A FOX swimming across a rapid river was carried by the force of
The Fox and the Hedgehog 
Fine feathers don't make fine birds.  
cock, among the birds of the dunghill."  
and lift up my voice to the stars, while you walk below, like a
"True," replied the Crane; "but I soar to the heights of heaven
rainbow; while you have not a bit of color on your wings."
robed, like a king, in gold and purple and all the colors of the
by, ridiculing the ashen hue of its plumage and saying, "I am
A PEACOCK spreading its gorgeous tail mocked a Crane that passed
The Peacock and the Crane 
Two blacks do not make one white.  
find you, when the day of payment comes?'  
outstrip me in your rapid flight.  How then shall I be able to
seize what he wants and to run off; and you, too, can quickly
was intended, excused herself, saying, "The Wolf is accustomed to
that the Wolf would be his surety.  The Sheep, fearing some fraud
A STAG asked a Sheep to lend him a measure of wheat, and said
The Stag, the Wolf, and the Sheep 
knew that way long before you were born."  
manage to pass.  "Save yourself the trouble," said the Bull; "I
and offered to go before and show him the way by which he could
a narrow passage which led to his stall.  A young Calf came up,
A BULL was striving with all his might to squeeze himself through
The Bull and the Calf 
distrust him.  
No one can be a friend if you know not whether to trust or
you fawn on me?'  
you are a friend, why do you bite me so hard? If an enemy, why do
act sincerely by me, and show yourself in your true colors.  If
play with another dog.  The Hare said to him, "I wish you would
would take her life, and at another fawning upon her, as if in
some distance, at one time biting her with his teeth as if he
A HOUND having started a Hare on the hillside pursued her for
The Dog and the Hare 
enemy and I shall perish together."  
purposely placed his head under the wheels, saying, "At least my
enemy, saw a wagon heavily laden with wood, and went and
being in great torment and not knowing how to rid himself of his
unceasingly with his stings, wounded him to death.  The Snake,
A WASP seated himself upon the head of a Snake and, striking him
The Wasp and the Snake 
Use serves to overcome dread.  
put a bridle in his mouth, and to let a child drive him.  
altogether deficient in spirit, he assumed such boldness as to
approach him.  Soon afterwards, observing that he was an animal
gentleness of the beast's temper, he summoned courage enough to
size that he ran away.  After a time, perceiving the meekness and
WHEN MAN first saw the Camel, he was so frightened at his vast
The Camel 
Be on guard against men who can strike from a distance.  
the attack of the man himself?'  
vain; for if he sends so fearful a messenger, how shall I abide
to back off at the first attack he replied:  "You counsel me in
who had seen it all happen told him to be of good courage and not
thee."  The wounded Lion rushed away in great fear, and when a Fox
from him thou mayest learn what I myself shall be when I assail
an arrow and said to the Lion:  "I send thee my messenger, that
alone challenged him to combat.  The Bowman immediately shot out
but all the beasts of the forest fled at his approach.  The Lion
A VERY SKILLFUL BOWMAN went to the mountains in search of game,
The Bowman and Lion 
Count the cost before you commit yourselves.  
we had not known who you were, and with whom you were fighting."
help them.  They replied, "We would willingly have helped you, if
THE HARES waged war with the Eagles, and called upon the Foxes to
The Hares and the Foxes 
the Wolves, they were set upon and torn to pieces.  
listened favorably to these proposals, and, entering the den of
will enjoy them in common, till we all are surfeited."  The Dogs
you will be persuaded by us, you will give us the sheep, and we
and while they eat the mutton throw only the bones to you.  If
put collars on your necks.  They make you also guard their sheep,
for men, who in return for your services flog you with whips and
point only.  We live in freedom, but you bow down to and slave
and live with us as brothers should? We differ from you in one
like us in so many things, not be entirely of one mind with us,
THE WOLVES thus addressed the Sheepdogs:  "Why should you, who are
The Wolves and the Sheepdogs 
present blessings.  
The desire for imaginary benefits often involves the loss of
trying to neigh, they forgot how to sing.  
enchanted with the sound, that they tried to imitate it; and, in
of song.  But having heard the neigh of the horse, they were so
TEE KITES of olden times, as well as the Swans, had the privilege
The Kites and the Swans 
of their master.  
In a change of government the poor change nothing beyond the name
panniers, what matters it to me whom I serve?'  
the Shepherd.  "Then," said the Ass, "as long as I carry the
conqueror will place on me two sets of panniers?'  "No," rejoined
lazily replied, "Why should I, pray? Do you think it likely the
fly with him, lest they should both be captured, but the animal
of a sudden by the cries of the enemy.  He appealed to the Ass to
A SHEPHERD, watching his Ass feeding in a meadow, was alarmed all
The Ass and the Old Shepherd 
and sleek, and never once laid another egg.  
a double allowance of barley.  From that day the Hen became fat
one, and at last, to gain her purpose, determined to give the Hen
often pondered how she might obtain two eggs daily instead of
A WOMAN possessed a Hen that gave her an egg every day.  She
The Woman and Her Hen 
Contentment with our lot is an element of happiness.  
the sea?'  
on the land, when by my nature and habits I am only adapted for
the Crab said, "I well deserve my fate, for what business had I
hungry ate him up.  Just as he was on the point of being eaten,
as its feeding ground.  A Fox came across him, and being very
A CRAB, forsaking the seashore, chose a neighboring green meadow
The Crab and the Fox 
retained our own privileges and have stood for ages."  
had not given up the rights of the ash, we might yet have
to a neighboring cedar, "The first step has lost us all.  If we
lamenting when too late the destruction of his companions, said
with his strokes the noblest giants of the forest.  An old oak,
to his axe from it, than he began to use it and quickly felled
him a young ash-tree.  No sooner had the man fitted a new handle
handle for his axe.  The Trees consented to his request and gave
A MAN came into a forest and asked the Trees to provide him a
The Trees and the Axe 
make themselves ridiculous.  
Those who assume a character which does not belong to them, only
crow, and her cry, you know, is no omen."  
proceed on our journey, my friend, for it is only the caw of a
it foreboded, when one of them said to his companion, "Let us
could.  The travelers turned towards the sound and wondered what
perching herself on one of the branches, cawed as loudly as she
some travelers approaching, the Crow flew up into a tree, and
by his flight the good or evil course of future events.  Seeing
of good omen and always attracted the attention of men, who noted
A CROW was jealous of the Raven, because he was considered a bird
The Crow and the Raven 
large misfortunes.  
Men often bear little grievances with less courage than they do
do, when you make such a fuss about a mere fall into the water?"
and said, "What would you do if you had to live here always as we
heavily.  Some Frogs frequenting the pool heard his lamentation,
fell, and not being able to rise on account of his load, groaned
was crossing through the water he lost his footing, stumbled and
AN ASS, carrying a load of wood, passed through a pond.  As he
The Ass and the Frogs 
the gain of which they were assured day by day.  
thus hoping to become rich all at once, deprived themselves of
differed in no respect from their other hens.  The foolish pair,
Having done so, they found to their surprise that the Hen
gold in its inside, and in order to get the gold they killed it. 
day.  They supposed that the Hen must contain a great lump of
A COTTAGER and his wife had a Hen that laid a golden egg every
The Hen and the Golden Eggs 
Misfortunes springing from ourselves are the hardest to bear.  
these wedges made from my own branches."  
aimed at my roots, but I do grieve at being torn in pieces by
Oak said with a sigh, "I do not care about the blows of the axe
making wedges of its own branches for dividing the trunk.  The
THE WOODCUTTER cut down a Mountain Oak and split it in pieces,
The Oak and the Woodcutters 
been caused by you."  
reason to lament the loss of their children, whose deaths have
distance and said to her, "Think how many men there are who have
her whelp.  A wild-boar Hunter, seeing her distress, stood at a
horns.  The Lioness came up, and bitterly lamented the death of
A BULL finding a lion's cub asleep gored him to death with his
The Bull, the Lioness, and the Wild-Boar Hunter 
Happy is the man who learns from the misfortunes of others.  
it from the Ass, by witnessing his fate."  
division? You are perfect to a fraction."  He replied, "I learned
"Who has taught you, my very excellent fellow, the art of
left to himself the smallest possible morsel.  The Lion said,
Fox accumulated all that they had killed into one large heap and
requested the Fox to do him the favor to make a division.  The
bursting out into a great rage, devoured the Ass.  Then he
requested the two others to make the first choice.  The Lion,
carefully divided the spoil into three equal shares and modestly
portion to each of the three partners in the treaty.  The Ass
on their return from the forest asked the Ass to allot his due
each other in the chase.  Having secured a large booty, the Lion
THE LION, the Fox and the Ass entered into an agreement to assist
The Lion, the Fox, and the Ass 
be relit" 
give thy light in silence.  Know that not even the stars need to
it again, and said:  "Boast no more, but henceforth be content to
arose, and the Lamp was immediately extinguished.  Its owner lit
that it gave more light than the sun.  Then a sudden puff of wind
A LAMP, soaked with too much oil and flaring brightly, boasted
The Lamp 
admit a wolf into the fold?'  
said, "Master, how can you expect the sheep to be safe if you
to shut up a wolf with them, when his Dog perceiving the wolf
A SHEPHERD penning his sheep in the fold for the night was about
The Shepherd and the Dog 
forsaken even the man on whose head they grew."  
that hairs which are not mine should fly from me, when they have
great glee joined in the joke by saying, "What a marvel it is
forth from his companions.  He pulled up his horse, and with
of wind blew off his hat and wig, at which a loud laugh rang
A BALD KNIGHT, who wore a wig, went out to hunt.  A sudden puff
The Bald Knight 
Everyone is more or less master of his own fate.  
themselves."  
much by their own folly they have really brought them on
find that men are sure to impute their calamities to me, however
thrown on me, and I shall get an ill name among mortals; for I
pray wake up:  for if you fall into the well, the blame will be
and waking him from his slumber thus addressed him:  "Good Sir,
to fall into the water, Dame Fortune, it is said, appeared to him
fatigue, on the very brink of a deep well.  Just as he was about
A TRAVELER wearied from a long journey lay down, overcome with
The Traveler and Fortune 
running for a dinner, but he for his life."  
replied, "You do not see the difference between us:  I was only
"The little one is the best runner of the two."  The Hound
up the chase.  A goat-herd seeing him stop, mocked him, saying
A HOUND started a Hare from his lair, but after a long run, gave
The Hare and the Hound 
laid to your roots."  
carpenters and the farmers, the axe would not so frequently be
pillars and posts, and prove yourselves so serviceable to the
which you are exposed:  for if you did not make such excellent
answer:  "You have only to thank yourselves for the misfortunes to
are the most continually in peril of the axe."  Jupiter made
no purpose the burden of life, as of all the trees that grow we
THE OAKS presented a complaint to Jupiter, saying, "We bear for
The Oaks and Jupiter 
The best intentions will not always ensure success.  
exposed.  
nurtured and reared in spite of the neglect to which it was
the too great affection of the Mother, while the despised one was
that the young one which was caressed and loved was smothered by
and care, but hates and neglects the other.  It happened once
Mother fondles one and nurtures it with the greatest affection
THE MONKEY, it is said, has two young ones at each birth.  The
The Monkeys and Their Mother 
in body, but in mind."  
"And how much more beautiful than you am I, who am decorated, not
which decorated his skin.  But the Fox, interrupting him, said,
the two.  The Leopard exhibited one by one the various spots
THE FOX and the Leopard disputed which was the more beautiful of
The Fox and the Leopard 
the audience.  
spectacle thus came to an end amidst the laughter and ridicule of
robes, they fought with one another for the nuts.  The dancing
instead of actors.  Pulling off their masks and tearing their
forgot their dancing and became (as indeed they were) Monkeys
threw them upon the stage.  The Monkeys at the sight of the nuts
bent on mischief, took from his pocket a handful of nuts and
repeated with great applause, till on one occasion a courtier,
danced as well as any of the courtiers.  The spectacle was often
pupils, and when arrayed in their rich clothes and masks, they
great mimics of men's actions, they showed themselves most apt
A PRINCE had some Monkeys trained to dance.  Being naturally
The Dancing Monkeys 
distress.  
It shows an evil disposition to take advantage of a friend in
Bull."  
let you know what is the respective strength of a Goat and a
you, but of the Lion.  Let that monster go away and I will soon
addressed him:  "Butt away as much as you will.  I have no fear of
the cave sharply attacked him with his horns.  The Bull quietly
had recently occupied.  As soon as he entered, a He-Goat left in
A BULL, escaping from a Lion, hid in a cave which some shepherds
The Bull and the Goat 
loaded with an abundance of riches."  
honor, I reaped no benefits:  but now that I maltreat you I am
altogether contradictory and unreasonable; for when I paid you
the Carpenter quickly picked up and said, "Well, I think thou art
When its head was knocked off, out came a stream of gold, which
image down from its pedestal and dashed it against the wall. 
became poorer and poorer.  At last, being very angry, he took his
the idol to make him rich, but in spite of his entreaties he
Mercury, before which he made offerings day by day, and begged
A VERY POOR MAN, a Carpenter by trade, had a wooden image of
The Image of Mercury and the Carpenter 
rendered him by the Eagle.  
sitting had fallen to pieces; and he marveled at the service
to the same place, to find that the wall under which he had been
Eagle let the bundle fall again.  Taking it up, the man returned
bundle from his head.  When the Peasant rose in pursuit, the
was not safe, he flew toward him and with his talons snatched a
his deliverer, for seeing the Peasant sitting under a wall which
the bird, set him free.  The Eagle did not prove ungrateful to
A PEASANT found an Eagle captured in a trap, and much admiring
The Peasant and the Eagle 
the chance of obtaining more."  
served, for having let go of the food that I had in my hand for
finding that the Hare also had run off, he said, "I am rightly
to catch the Hart, and returned to feed upon the Hare.  On
awoke and scudded away.  The Lion was unable after a long chase
left the Hare to follow him.  The Hare, scared by the noise,
the act of seizing her, when a fine young Hart trotted by, and he
A LION came across a Hare, who was fast asleep.  He was just in
The Lion and the Hare 
mischief."  
are times when the small and lowly are the strongest to do
which the Mouse said, "The great do not always prevail.  There
rising up, and not knowing what to do, was sadly perplexed.  At
flank, and again biting him, retreated to his hole.  The Bull
outside the hole.  The Mouse peeped out, crept furtively up his
could rout out the Mouse, and crouching down, went to sleep
the Bull dug into the walls with his horns, he tired before he
capture him.  But the Mouse reached his hole in safety.  Though
A BULL was bitten by a Mouse and, angered by the wound, tried to
The Mouse and the Bull 
treated these poor Ants?'  
dealings of Providence, who hast thyself in a similar manner
said, "And are you indeed to make yourself a judge of the
presented himself, and striking the Philosopher with his wand,
immediately trampled them all to death with his foot.  Mercury
he was standing.  One of them climbed up and stung him, and he
found himself surrounded by a whole army of Ants, near whose nest
persons to perish.  As he was indulging in these reflections, he
one criminal perchance sailing in the ship allow so many innocent
against the injustice of Providence, which would for the sake of
of which the crew and passengers were all drowned.  He inveighed
A PHILOSOPHER witnessed from the shore the shipwreck of a vessel,
The Philosopher, the Ants, and Mercury 
Every man should be content to mind his own business.  
has no business to seek its food from the sea."  
exclaimed:  "You richly deserve your fate; for a bird of the air
gullet-bag and lay down on the shore to die.  A Kite saw him and
A SEAGULL having bolted down too large a fish, burst its deep
The Seagull and the Kite 
home grieving sorely.  
harvest; but the Farmer reaped nothing that year and returned
of the Farmer who had captured him.  It was the time of the wheat
it on fire.  The Fox by a strange fatality rushed to the fields
revenge, tied some rope well soaked in oil to his tail, and set
yard, caught him at last, and being determined to take an ample
A FARMER, who bore a grudge against a Fox for robbing his poultry
The Farmer and the Fox 
another.  
In avoiding one evil, care must be taken not to fall into
from man, only to throw myself into the mouth of a wild beast?'  
her to pieces.  "Woe is me," exclaimed the Doe, "who have escaped
but when she was safe within the cave, sprang upon her and tore
to a Lion.  The Lion concealed himself on seeing her approach,
A DOE hard pressed by hunters sought refuge in a cave belonging
The Doe and the Lion 
all the profit.  
It sometimes happens that one man has all the toil, and another
only to serve the turn of a Fox."  
"Woe be to us, that we should have fought and belabored ourselves
Lion and the Bear saw him, but not being able to get up, said,
them, and seizing the Kid scampered off as fast as he could.  The
with the Kid lying untouched in the middle.  He ran in between
distance several times, saw them both stretched on the ground
exhausted with fatigue.  A Fox, who had gone round them at a
each other and were faint from the long combat, they lay down
fiercely for its possession.  When they had fearfully lacerated
A LION and a Bear seized a Kid at the same moment, and fought
The Lion, the Bear, and the Fox 
meal-bag, we will not come near you."  
said, "Ah, my good madam, even though you should turn into a
to be dead.  One of the Mice, peeping stealthily out, saw her and
she jumped upon a peg, and suspending herself from it, pretended
that she must tempt them forth by some device.  For this purpose
holes.  The Cat was no longer able to get at them and perceived
Fearing for their lives, the Mice kept themselves close in their
made her way into it and began to catch and eat them one by one. 
A CERTAIN HOUSE was overrun with Mice.  A Cat, discovering this,
The Cat and the Mice 
Do nothing without a regard to the consequences.  
we get out again from so great a depth?'  
greater caution, "But suppose the water should fail us.  How can
will furnish us with shelter and food."  The other replied with
to the other, "Let us descend and make our abode in this well:  it
supplied with water, and when they saw it, one of the Frogs said
home.  As they went along they chanced to pass a deep well, amply
the summer's heat, they left it and set out together for another
TWO FROGS dwelt in the same pool.  When the pool dried up under
The Two Frogs 
for your assistance against greater antagonists?'  
Hercules! if you will not help me against a Flea, how can I hope
Flea a second time hopped upon his foot, he groaned and said, "O
causing the man to call loudly upon Hercules for help.  When the
A FLEA settled upon the bare foot of a Wrestler and bit him,
The Flea and the Wrestler 
try and catch fish?'  
served; for what business had I who had never handled a net to
drowned.  With his last breath he said to himself, "I am rightly
threw it into the river, but became tangled in the meshes and
endeavored to do as they had done.  Having handled the net, he
most imitative of animals, descended from the treetop and
dinner left their nets upon the bank.  The Monkey, who is the
The Fishermen after a while gave up fishing, and on going home to
their nets into a river, and narrowly watched their proceedings. 
A MONKEY perched upon a lofty tree saw some Fishermen casting
The Monkey and the Fishermen 
Necessity knows no law.  
my friend and I must have our dinners."  
is true.  You are a capital bird at telling the time of day.  But
to visit the bird-trap in the morning?'  He replied, "What you say
Who will wake you to your daily tasks or tell you when it is time
kill me, who will announce to you the appearance of the dawn? 
the Cock expostulated in piteous tones from his perch:  "If you
to pick out a fine young Cock just attaining to his comb.  But
answering birds?'  The Birdcatcher spared his life, and determined
nets? Who would chirp you to sleep, or call for you the covey of
life:  "What would you do without me when next you spread your
he had tamed for a decoy.  The bird entreated earnestly for his
he had caught nothing, and he had to kill a pied Partridge, which
friend unexpectedly came in.  The bird-trap was quite empty, as
A BIRDCATCHER was about to sit down to a dinner of herbs when a
The Birdcatcher, the Partridge, and the Cock 
speech."  
as your words, and if your hands had not been traitors to your
should have thanked you fervently if your deeds had been as good
leave me without a word of thanks."  The Fox replied, "Indeed, I
"You ungrateful fellow, you owe your life to me, and yet you
Woodcutter:  whereon he called to him and reproached him, saying,
well away, the Fox departed without taking any notice of the
his word, hastened forward in the chase.  As soon as they were
hidden.  The huntsman took no notice of the signs, but believing
all the time he was speaking, to the hut where the Fox lay
the Fox.  He declared that he had not seen him, and yet pointed,
up with his hounds and inquired of the Woodcutter if he had seen
Fox crept in and hid himself in a corner.  The huntsman soon came
The Woodcutter advised him to take shelter in his own hut, so the
felling an oak and begged him to show him a safe hiding-place. 
A FOX, running before the hounds, came across a Woodcutter
The Fox and the Woodcutter 
out."  
such as you were when you crept in, and then you will easily get
"Ah, you will have to remain there, my friend, until you become
his complaining.  On learning what had happened, he said to him,
passing by heard his cries, and coming up, inquired the cause of
get out, and began to groan and lament his fate.  Another Fox
meal.  When he finished, he was so full that he was not able to
in the hollow of an oak, crept into the hole and made a hearty
A VERY HUNGRY FOX, seeing some bread and meat left by shepherds
The Swollen Fox 
and preserved his life by his melody.  
burst forth into song and thus made himself known by his voice,
Swan instead of the Goose.  The Swan, threatened with death,
distinguish one bird from the other.  By mistake he caught the
get him at night, when it was dark, and he was not able to
song.  When the time came for killing the Goose, the cook went to
fed the one for his table and kept the other for the sake of its
A CERTAIN rich man bought in the market a Goose and a Swan.  He
The Swan and the Goose 
that into the bargain."  
Sculptor replied, "Well, if you will buy these, I'll fling you
Messenger of the Gods, and author of all your gain."  The
certainly want much more for this, as it is the statue of the
pointed to a figure of himself, saying to the Sculptor, "You will
and Juno.  When the sum at which they were valued was named, he
various statues, he demanded the price of two figures of Jupiter
visited in this disguise a Sculptor's studio having looked at
mortals.  For this purpose he assumed the character of a man and
MERCURY ONCE DETERMINED to learn in what esteem he was held among
Mercury and the Sculptor 
hear his roar at a distance?'  
farmyard when you know that you shake in your shoes if you only
moment think of shutting up a Lion along with you in your
"On my word, you are rightly served, for how could you for a
his wife, who had been a spectator to all that took place, said,
grievously lamented the destruction of his sheep and oxen, but
the gate and released the Lion.  On his departure the Farmer
The Farmer, beginning to be alarmed for his own safety, opened
flew upon the sheep and killed them, and then attacked the oxen. 
shut the gate.  When the Lion found that he could not escape, he
A LION entered a farmyard.  The Farmer, wishing to catch him,
The Lion in a Farmyard 
using them."  
to have to sharpen my weapons just at the time I ought to be
or hound.  He replied, "I do it advisedly; for it would never do
teeth when there was no danger threatening from either huntsman
trunk.  A Fox passing by asked him why he thus sharpened his
A WILD BOAR stood under a tree and rubbed his tusks against the
The Wild Boar and the Fox 
The hero is brave in deeds as well as words.  
only I am in search of, not the Lion himself."  
replied, "No, thank you.  I did not ask that; it is his track
turning very pale and chattering with his teeth from fear,
said the man, "at once show you the Lion himself."  The Hunter,
marks of his footsteps or knew where his lair was.  "I will,"
He asked a man felling oaks in the forest if he had seen any
A HUNTER, not very bold, was searching for the tracks of a Lion. 
The Hunter and the Woodman 
were to forego my present certain gain."  
simple fellow if, for the chance of a greater uncertain profit, I
profit of me."  The Fisherman replied, "I should indeed be a very
the rich, and then you can catch me again, and make a handsome
the sea.  I shall soon become a large fish fit for the tables of
come to my full size.  Pray spare my life, and put me back into
good can I be to you, and how little am I worth? I am not yet
panting convulsively, thus entreated for his life:  "O Sir, what
a single small Fish as the result of his day's labor.  The Fish,
A FISHERMAN who lived on the produce of his nets, one day caught
The Fisherman and the Little Fish 
Stoop to conquer.  
therefore remain unbroken, and escape."  
we on the contrary bend before the least breath of air, and
contend with the wind, and consequently you are destroyed; while
crushed by these strong winds."  They replied, "You fight and
wonder how you, who are so light and weak, are not entirely
stream.  It fell among some Reeds, which it thus addressed:  "I
A VERY LARGE OAK was uprooted by the wind and thrown across a
The Oak and the Reeds 
make me useful to him."  
present owner, who will even after I am dead tan my hide, and
other of my former masters, than to have been bought by my
either starved by the one, or to have been overworked by the
said, groaning:  "It would have been better for me to have been
fallen into worse hands, and noting his master's occupation,
ordained that he be sold to a tanner.  The Ass found that he had
that it would be the last time that he could grant his request,
petitioned for another change of master.  Jupiter, telling him
heavier loads to carry and harder work in the brick-field, he
be sold to a tile-maker.  Shortly afterwards, finding that he had
after warning him that he would repent his request, caused him to
his present service and provided with another master.  Jupiter,
and too much work made a petition to Jupiter to be released from
AN ASS, belonging to an herb-seller who gave him too little food
The Ass and His Masters 
In quarreling about the shadow we often lose the substance.  
galloped off.  
proceeded from words to blows, and while the men fought, the Ass
with the hire of the Ass, hired his Shadow also.  The quarrel
Ass only, and not his Shadow.  The Traveler asserted that he had,
right to the Shadow.  The owner maintained that he had let the
violent dispute arose between them as to which of them had the
and as the Traveler and the owner of the Ass both claimed it, a
the Shadow of the Ass.  As this afforded only protection for one,
Traveler stopped to rest, and sought shelter from the heat under
day being intensely hot, and the sun shining in its strength, the
A TRAVELER hired an Ass to convey him to a distant place.  The
The Ass and His Shadow 
none but those who work are entitled to eat?'  
you not know that labor is the source of every blessing, and that
eat after my toil, you wake up and wag your tail for food.  Do
hammering on the anvil, you sleep on the mat; and when I begin to
wretched little sluggard! what shall I do to you? While I am
pretending to be angry and shaking his stick at him, said, "You
if he would ask for a share of his meal.  His master one day,
dinner and began to eat, the Dog woke up and wagged his tail, as
his metals the Dog slept; but when, on the other hand, he went to
master, and his constant companion.  While he hammered away at
A BRAZIER had a little Dog, which was a great favorite with his
The Brazier and His Dog 
Our mere anticipations of life outrun its realities.  
see but a load of wood."  
"We have waited for no purpose, for after all there is nothing to
large faggot of sticks, and one of them said to his companions,
however it reached the beach, they discovered that it was only a
that it could at the most be a small boat, and not a ship.  When
they looked was driven nearer to shore by the wind, they found
hope of seeing it enter the harbor, but as the object on which
distance what they thought was a large ship.  They waited in the
summit of a tall cliff, and looking over the sea, saw in the
SOME TRAVELERS, journeying along the seashore, climbed to the
The Seaside Travelers 
ground, and all her imaginary schemes perished in a moment.  
unison with her thoughts, when down fell the milk pail to the
and refuse them every one."  At this moment she tossed her head in
all the young fellows will propose to me, but I will toss my head
gown.  In this dress I will go to the Christmas parties, where
the year I shall have money enough from my share to buy a new
when poultry will fetch the highest price, so that by the end of
fifty chickens.  The chickens will become ready for the market
The eggs, allowing for all mishaps, will produce two hundred and
this milk will be sold, will buy at least three hundred eggs. 
to the farmhouse, when she fell a-musing.  "The money for which
A FARMER'S daughter was carrying her Pail of milk from the field
The Milk-Woman and Her Pail 
Evil wishes, like chickens, come home to roost.  
and then you will die from the loss of it."  
For if you use your sting, it shall remain in the wound you make,
have your request, but it will be at the peril of your own life. 
because of his promise.  He thus answered the Bee:  "You shall
for he loved the race of man, but could not refuse the request
to take my honey, I may kill him."  Jupiter was much displeased,
"Give me, I pray thee, a sting, that if any mortal shall approach
whatever she should ask.  She therefore besought him, saying,
Jupiter, delighted with the offering of honey, promised to give
Olympus to present Jupiter some honey fresh from her combs. 
A BEE from Mount Hymettus, the queen of the hive, ascended to
The Bee and Jupiter 
am."  
be praised for what I have been, than to be blamed for what I
ever, but I could not help my infirmities.  I rather deserve to
and said, "It was not my fault.  master:  my spirit was as good as
disappointed, and fiercely abused the dog.  The Hound looked up
the boar escaped.  His master, quickly coming up, was very much
not retain his hold because of the decay of his teeth, so that
boar in the chase.  He seized him boldly by the ear, but could
yielded to any beast of the forest, encountered in his old age a
A HOUND, who in the days of his youth and strength had never
The Old Hound 
double death."  
treatment from thee, a disgrace to Nature, is indeed to die a
insults of the brave, but to be compelled to endure such
heels.  The expiring Lion said, "I have reluctantly brooked the
assailed with impunity, he let drive at his forehead with his
were an enemy.  When the Ass saw that the huge beast could be
Shortly afterwards the Bull with his horns gored him as if he
avenged with a stroke of his tusks a long-remembered injury. 
the ground at the point of death.  A Boar rushed upon him, and
A LION, worn out with years and powerless from disease, lay on
The Old Lion 
He who shares the danger ought to share the prize.  
Say 'I,' not 'We' are undone."  
speech, my friend; what you thought right then, think right now. 
undone."  "Nay," replied the other, "keep to your first mode of
axe pursuing them, and he who had picked up the axe said, "We are
an axe."  They had not gone far before they saw the owner of the
friend," replied the other, "do not say 'I,' but 'We' have found
that lay upon the path, and said, "I have found an axe."  "Nay, my
TWO MEN were journeying together.  One of them picked up an axe
The Two Travelers and the Axe 
others.  
They are not wise who give to themselves the credit due to
Ass."  
dull-head! it is not yet come to this, that men pay worship to an
whip lustily about his shoulders and said, "O you perverse
to move another step.  The driver, seeing him thus stop, laid his
himself, bristled up with pride, gave himself airs, and refused
thinking that they bowed their heads in token of respect for
the crowd made lowly prostration before the Image.  The Ass,
Image, to be placed in one of its Temples.  As he passed along,
AN ASS once carried through the streets of a city a famous wooden
The Ass Carrying the Image 
admit any interference from you in our affairs."  
would far rather be destroyed in our battle with each other than
would accept him as an umpire.  One of the Dolphins replied, "We
waves and said that he would reconcile their differences if they
the battle was at its height, a Sprat lifted its head out of the
THE DOLPHINS and Whales waged a fierce war with each other.  When
The Dolphins, the Whales, and the Sprat 
clamor you would raise if I were to do as you are doing!"  
of mutton for their dinner.  Approaching them, he said, "What a
A WOLF, passing by, saw some Shepherds in a hut eating a haunch
The Wolf and the Shepherds 
He is not to be trusted as a friend who mistreats his own family. 
expect him to spare us?'  
the master spare not his oxen, who work for his gain, how can we
counsel together, and said, "It is time for us to be off, for if
slaughter his yoke oxen for food.  On seeing this, his Dogs took
his household.  The storm still continuing, he was obliged to
all killed his sheep, and then his goats, for the maintenance of
A CERTAIN MAN, detained by a storm in his country house, first of
The Master and His Dogs 
Every man for himself.  
a covering of hides; and nothing so good as leather."  
from you altogether:  there is no material for resistance equal to
defense.  Upon which a Currier stood up and said, "Sirs, I differ
equal enthusiasm, proposed timber as a preferable method of
the best material for an effective resistance.  A Carpenter, with
enemy.  A Bricklayer earnestly recommended bricks as affording
together to consider the best means of protecting it from the
A GREAT CITY was besieged, and its inhabitants were called
The Three Tradesmen 
very great amusement."  
yesterday, and you all laughed heartily, as if it afforded you
cudgel.  The Ass said, "Why, I saw the Monkey do this very thing
quickly drove him down, beating him severely with a thick wooden
there, broke in the tiling.  The owner went up after him and
AN ASS climbed up to the roof of a building, and frisking about
The Playful Ass 
briny."  
said, "Pray cease to flow into me, and then you will not be made
The Sea, perceiving that they intended to throw the blame on him,
work in us such a change, and make us salty and unfit to drink?"
is it that when we flow into your tides so potable and sweet, you
THE RIVERS joined together to complain to the Sea, saying, "Why
The Rivers and the Sea 
enough to spoil the appetite."  
mine ever be in such a plight; for the weight of this chain is
"The master," he replied.  Then said the Wolf:  "May no friend of
compelled him to drag that heavy log about wherever he went. 
his neck asked him who it was that fed him so well and yet
A WOLF, meeting a big well-fed Mastiff with a wooden collar about
The Wolf and the Housedog 
the Cat," there was no one found to do it.  
when the Mice further debated who among them should thus "bell
run away and hide themselves in their holes at his approach.  But
that the Mice, being warned by the sound of the tinkling, might
favor was the proposal to tie a bell to the neck of the Cat, so
the Cat.  Among the many plans suggested, the one that found most
means of warning themselves of the approach of their great enemy
THE MICE summoned a council to decide how they might best devise
The Mice in Council 
The more honor the more danger.  
captured and eaten by the Weasels.  
get in on account of the ornaments on their heads, were all
as they could to their holes.  The generals, not being able to
when a great rout overwhelmed the Mice, who scampered off as fast
conspicuous to all their troops.  Scarcely had the battle begun,
generals bound their heads with straws, that they might be more
proclaimed war by challenging the Weasels, the newly chosen
done, and the army disciplined, and the herald Mouse had duly
formed into troops, regiments, and battalions.  When all this was
fight, so that they might be better marshaled in battle array and
counsel, as well as those most noted for their courage in the
were most renowned for their family descent, strength, and
lack of discipline.  They therefore chose as leaders Mice that
army to command them, and that they were exposed to dangers from
defeats was that they had no leaders set apart from the general
victors.  The Mice thought that the cause of their frequent
in which much blood was shed.  The Weasels were always the
THE WEASELS and the Mice waged a perpetual war with each other,
The Mice and the Weasels 
False confidence often leads into danger.  
tore him to pieces.  
no long distance, when the Lion, turning about, seized him and
attack him, and galloped after him for that purpose.  He had run
trepidation at the mere crowing of a Cock summoned courage to
the Lion fled away as fast as he could.  The Ass, observing his
the Lion, it is said, has a singular aversion) crowed loudly, and
spring upon the Ass, when the Cock (to the sound of whose voice
desperate from hunger, approached the spot.  He was about to
AN ASS and a Cock were in a straw-yard together when a Lion,
The Ass, the Cock, and the Lion 
again in want of dates, and therefore looks quiet."  
unruffled calm of the Sea, he interrupted him and said, "It is
Not long afterwards when someone passed by and observed the
overboard, and barely escaped with his life in the empty ship. 
ship being in danger of sinking, he threw all his merchandise
dates, and set sail.  But a very great tempest came on, and the
to commerce.  He sold all his flock, invested it in a cargo of
Sea very calm and smooth, and longed to make a voyage with a view
A SHEPHERD, keeping watch over his sheep near the shore, saw the
The Shepherd and the Sea 
for safety, so much more perilous."  
land, and after all to find this seashore, to which I had come
wretched creature that I am! to take such precaution against the
Yielding up her last breath, she gasped forth this lament:  "O
saw her, and taking a successful aim, mortally wounded her. 
entertained no anticipation of danger.  Some boatmen sailing by
or hound, and her injured eye towards the sea, from whence she
that she might get the earliest tidings of the approach of hunter
her greater safety.  She turned her sound eye towards the land
edge of the cliff as she possibly could, in the hope of securing
A DOE blind in one eye was accustomed to graze as near to the
The One-Eyed Doe 
friends, than to become the food of Crows or Vultures."  
once made up their quarrel, saying, "It is better for us to make
the distance to feast on the one that should fall first.  They at
fiercer renewal of the fight, they saw some Vultures waiting in
combat.  When they stopped suddenly to catch their breath for a
drink first, and were soon engaged in the agonies of a mortal
small well to drink.  They fiercely disputed which of them should
among the beasts, a Lion and a Boar came at the same moment to a
ON A SUMMER DAY, when the great heat induced a general thirst
The Lion and the Boar 
power of living upon the land."  
giving me the sovereignty of the sea, has quite denied me the
replied, "Nay, my friend, blame not me, but Nature, which, while
reach the land.  The Lion abused him as a traitor.  The Dolphin
assistance, was unable to do so, as he could not by any means
to help him.  The Dolphin, though quite willing to give him
the Lion had a combat with a wild bull, and called on the Dolphin
Dolphin gladly consented to this request.  Not long afterwards
was the sovereign ruler of all the inhabitants of the ocean.  The
since the one was the king of beasts on the earth, and the other
saying that of all the animals they ought to be the best friends,
of the waves, and suggested that they contract an alliance,
A LION roaming by the seashore saw a Dolphin lift up its head out
The Lion and the Dolphin 
adversity.  
We must make friends in prosperity if we would have their help in
up to them?'  
filching from their very altars a part of the sacrifice offered
think will pity you? Is there one whom you have not outraged by
prolonged."  She replied, "Alas! my son, which of the gods do you
mourn, but at once invoke the gods that my life may be
A KITE, sick unto death, said to his mother:  "O Mother! do not
The Sick Kite 
own wings."  
exclaimed, "that I should perish by an arrow feathered from my
been furnished by himself.  "It is a double grief to me," he
his heart and saw in that single glance that its feathers had
mortally.  The Eagle gave one look at the arrow that had entered
from a place of concealment, took an accurate aim and wounded him
whom he sought to make his prey.  An archer, who saw the Eagle
AN EAGLE sat on a lofty rock, watching the movements of a Hare
The Eagle and the Arrow 
Might makes right.  
set off as fast as you can."  
of great evil to you, unless you willingly resign it to me, and
in the chase:  and the third share (believe me) will be a source
"because I am King:  and the second share, as a partner with you
into three shares.  "I will take the first share," he said,
undertook to distribute the prey, and for this purpose divided it
had taken as many beasts as their necessities required, the Lion
Ass gave the Lion the benefit of his greater speed.  When they
agreed to assist the Wild Ass with his strength, while the Wild
capture the beasts of the forest with greater ease.  The Lion
A WILD ASS and a Lion entered into an alliance so that they might
The Wild Ass and the Lion 
The least outlay is not always the greatest gain.  
the shearer, who will shear and not hurt me."  
me in an instant; but if you want my fleece and wool, there is
wool? If you want my flesh, there is the butcher, who will kill
do you hurt me so, Mistress? What weight can my blood add to the
she sheared the flesh.  The Sheep, writhing with pain, said, "Why
herself, but used the shears so unskillfully that with the fleece
wishing to take his fleece and to avoid expense, she sheared him
A CERTAIN poor widow had one solitary Sheep.  At shearing time,
The Widow and the Sheep 
Avoid a remedy that is worse than the disease.  
pounce upon in a whole year.  
and slew a larger number of them in one day than the Kite could
admitted him into the cote, they found that he made more havoc
the Hawk to defend them.  He at once consented.  When they had
THE PIGEONS, terrified by the appearance of a Kite, called upon
The Hawk, the Kite, and the Pigeons 
should be seized and killed.  
straw.  Then summoning his laborers, he ordered that the Stag
spied the tips of the antlers of the Stag peeping out of the
cobwebs away."  While he thus examined everything in turn, he
for them to lie on.  Those lazy fellows have not even swept the
there such a scarcity of fodder? There is not half enough straw
properly fed, he went up to their racks and cried out:  "Why is
entered, and having had to complain that his oxen had not been
life is still in peril."  At that moment the master himself
as it were a hundred eyes, and until he has come and gone, your
over.  There is one other yet to pass through the shed, who has
answered him:  "We indeed wish you well, but the danger is not
kindly helped him in the hour of need.  One of them again
safety, began to express his sincere thanks to the Oxen who had
failed to notice him.  The Stag, congratulating himself on his
farm-bailiff with several laborers passed through the shed and
came to feed his cattle, but did not see the Stag; and even the
effecting my escape."  At the approach of the evening the herdsman
am, and I will undertake to find some favorable opportunity of
enemy?'  The Stag replied:  "Only allow me, friend, to stay where I
accord, incur destruction and trust yourself in the house of your
warning:  "O unhappy creature! why should you thus, of your own
himself in a shed among the oxen.  An Ox gave him this kindly
danger he was running into, took shelter in a farmyard and hid
A STAG, roundly chased by the hounds and blinded by fear to the
The Stag in the Ox-Stall 
Children are not to be blamed for the faults of their parents.  
others."  
taught me to labor, but to depend for subsistence on the labor of
blame me, my friend, but find fault with the master, who has not
on the fruits of my exertions."  The Housedog replied, "Do not
this labor, while you, who do not assist in the chase, luxuriate
reproached his companion, saying, "It is very hard to have all
share of his spoil.  The Hound, feeling much aggrieved at this,
after a good day's sport, he always gave the Housedog a large
and a Housedog, taught to watch the house.  When he returned home
A MAN had two dogs:  a Hound, trained to assist him in his sports,
The Two Dogs 
wanting."  
Crow:  "My good Crow, your voice is right enough, but your wit is
the flesh.  The Fox quickly picked it up, and thus addressed the
the reflection cast upon her voice, set up a loud caw and dropped
Birds!"  This he said deceitfully; but the Crow, anxious to refute
her beauty, she would deservedly be considered the Queen of
fairness of her complexion! Oh, if her voice were only equal to
Crow," he exclaimed, in the beauty of her shape and in the
himself, and by a wily stratagem succeeded.  "How handsome is the
in her beak.  A Fox, seeing this, longed to possess the meat
A CROW having stolen a bit of meat, perched in a tree and held it
The Fox and the Crow 
The memory of a good deed lives.  
perfume!"  
leaves behind in the very vessel which contained it so sweet a
delicious! How nice must the Wine itself have been, when it
nose, and drawing it backwards and forwards said, "O most
former contents.  She greedily placed it several times to her
prime old wine and which still retained the fragrant smell of its
AN OLD WOMAN found an empty jar which had lately been full of
The Old Woman and the Wine-Jar 
Abstain and enjoy.  
wish to retain the fruits of his own sport."  
frequent use the pleasure of your exchange, and each will again
them, "If you go on in this way, you will soon destroy by
time the same exchange day after day.  Finally a neighbor said to
Each was so well pleased with his bargain that they made for some
They quickly agreed to exchange the produce of their day's sport. 
experienced an equal longing for the contents of the game-bag. 
with fish.  The Huntsman wished to have the fish, and their owner
chance with a Fisherman who was bringing home a basket well laden
A HUNTSMAN, returning with his dogs from the field, fell in by
The Huntsman and the Fisherman 
falling back through the meshes of the net into the sea.  
to the shore; but he could not prevent the smaller fish from
handling of his net to retain all the large fish and to draw them
and captured a great haul of fish.  He managed by a skillful
A FISHERMAN, engaged in his calling, made a very successful cast
The Fisherman and His Nets 
What's bred in the bone will stick to the flesh.  
complexion.  
servant caught a severe cold, but he never changed his color or
of cleaning, and subjected the man to incessant scrubbings.  The
former masters.  On bringing him home he resorted to every means
his skin arose from dirt contracted through the neglect of his
THE PURCHASER of a black servant was persuaded that the color of
The Aethiop 
Hypocritical speeches are easily seen through.  
make me provide the meat also."  
Sheep, "if I should bring you the draught, you would doubtless
will find means to provide myself with meat."  "Yes," said the
close beside him.  "For," he said, "if you will bring me drink, I
passing, and asked him to fetch some water from a stream flowing
his lair.  Being in want of food, he called to a Sheep who was
A WOLF, sorely wounded and bitten by dogs, lay sick and maimed in
The Wolf and the Sheep 
Equals make the best friends.  
and besides, I by no means wish to come near you."  
if you touch me ever so slightly, I shall be broken in pieces,
Brass Pot, "Pray keep at a distance and do not come near me, for
earthenware and the other of brass.  The Earthen Pot said to the
A RIVER carried down in its stream two Pots, one made of
The Two Pots 
injuring you.  
Benefits bestowed upon the evil-disposed increase their means of
should beg every Dog in the town to bite me."  
advice and said, "Why? If I should do so, it would be as if I
Dog that bit you."  The Man who had been bitten laughed at this
dip it in the blood from your wound, and go and give it to the
wanted, said, "If you would be cured, take a piece of bread, and
who might heal him.  A friend, meeting him and learning what he
A MAN who had been bitten by a Dog went about in quest of someone
The Man Bitten by a Dog 
Harm hatch, harm catch.  
carried off a prisoner, and was eaten by the Hawk.  
Frog, being still fastened to the leg of the Mouse, was also
it, and, pouncing upon it with his talons, carried it aloft.  The
on the surface, tied to the foot of the Frog.  A Hawk observed
was soon suffocated by the water, and his dead body floated about
croaking about, as if he had done a good deed.  The unhappy Mouse
Mouse with him.  The Frog enjoyed the water amazingly, and swam
reaching the very brink, he suddenly jumped in, dragging the
gradually led him towards the pool in which he lived, until
they were accustomed to find their food.  After this, he
Frog first of all led his friend the Mouse to the meadow where
foot of the Mouse tightly to his own.  Thus joined together, the
in the water.  The Frog, one day intent on mischief, bound the
an intimate acquaintance with a Frog, who lived for the most part
A MOUSE who always lived on the land, by an unlucky chance formed
The Mouse, the Frog, and the Hawk 
Better poverty without care, than riches with.  
Fir-Tree."  
would have reason to wish that you had grown up a Bramble, not a
to mind the axes and saws which are about to hew you down, you
The Bramble answered:  'You poor creature, if you would only call
nothing at all; while I am everywhere used for roofs and houses."
A FIR-TREE said boastingly to the Bramble, "You are useful for
The Fir-Tree and the Bramble 
lifting up the load, you may place it again upon my shoulders."  
reason he had called him.  The Old Man hurriedly replied, "That,
immediately appeared in answer to his summons and asked for what
throwing down his load, besought "Death" to come.  "Death"
wearied with his long journey.  He sat down by the wayside, and
carrying the faggots to the city for sale one day, became very
AN OLD MAN was employed in cutting wood in the forest, and, in
The Old Man and Death 
led to a disgraceful death."  
lesson-book, I should not have come to this, nor have been thus
you had beaten me when I first stole and brought to you that
upbraided him as an unnatural child, whereon he replied, "Ah! if
seized her ear with his teeth and bit it off.  The Mother
my Mother in her ear."  She came close to him, and he quickly
sorrow, whereupon the young man said, "I wish to say something to
Mother followed in the crowd and violently beat her breast in
behind him, was led away to the place of public execution.  His
last he was caught in the very act, and having his hands bound
adulthood, proceeded to steal things of still greater value.  At
her, and she again commended him.  The Youth, advanced to
but encouraged him.  He next time stole a cloak and brought it to
it home to his Mother.  She not only abstained from beating him,
A BOY stole a lesson-book from one of his schoolfellows and took
The Thief and His Mother 
all others' rights are protected, I alone should suffer wrong."  
and exclaimed:  "Woe to me a stranger! that in this place where
nestlings.  The Swallow, finding her nest empty, lamented greatly
nest from its hole in the wall ate up the young unfledged
and there hatched seven young birds.  A Serpent gliding past the
with men, built herself a nest in the wall of a Court of Justice
A SWALLOW, returning from abroad and especially fond of dwelling
The Swallow, the Serpent, and the Court of Justice 
idleness, because you were presently to be sacrificed."  
smile to the Heifer:  "For this you were allowed to live in
the occasion.  The Ox saw what was being done, and said with a
with cords and led him away to the altar to be slain in honor of
the owner released the Ox from his yoke, but bound the Heifer
compelled to labor.  Shortly afterwards, at the harvest festival,
tormented him with reflections on his unhappy fate in being
A HEIFER saw an Ox hard at work harnessed to a plow, and
The Heifer and the Ox 
Example is more powerful than precept.  
child.  
vain, and submitted without remonstrance to the reproof of her
straight way, I will promise to walk in it."  The Mother tried in
replied:  "Quite true, dear Mother; and if you will show me the
It is far more becoming to go straight forward."  The young Crab
A CRAB said to her son, "Why do you walk so one-sided, my child?
The Crab and Its Mother 
superabundant crop.  
the vines repaid their labor by an extraordinary and
over every portion of their land.  They found no treasure, but
after his death, took their spades and mattocks and carefully dug
there is a great treasure hid in one of my vineyards."  The sons,
given it.  He called them to his bedside and said, "My sons,
sons would give the same attention to his farm as he himself had
A FATHER, being on the point of death, wished to be sure that his
The Farmer and His Sons 
wishes?'  
and you for dry weather, with which of the two am I to join my
might be dried."  He said to her, "If your sister wishes for rain,
continue, and the sun shine hot and bright, so that the bricks
nothing, and have only one wish, that the dry weather may
likewise inquired of her how she fared; she replied, "I want for
after, he went to the daughter who had married the tilemaker, and
rain, in order that the plants may be well watered."  Not long
me, and I have only one wish, that there may be a heavy fall of
things went with her.  She said, "All things are prospering with
had married the gardener, and inquired how she was and how all
other to a tile-maker.  After a time he went to the daughter who
A MAN had two daughters, the one married to a gardener, and the
The Father and His Two Daughters 
sharp lookout, or you will lose some of your own flock."  
Shepherd, "Since you have taught me to steal, you must keep a
flocks.  The Wolf, having shown himself an apt pupil, said to the
after a while taught it to steal lambs from the neighboring
 A SHEPHERD once found the whelp of a Wolf and brought it up, and
The Shepherd and the Wolf 
of that monster."  
I assure you, sooner burst than successfully imitate the hugeness
yourself out," said her son, "and do not be angry; for you would,
the beast was as big as that in size."  "Cease, Mother, to puff
his cloven heel."  The Frog, puffing herself out, inquired, "if
four great feet came to the pool and crushed him to death with
"He is dead, dear Mother; for just now a very huge beast with
one of her sons, inquired of his brothers what had become of him. 
crushed one of them to death.  The Mother coming up, and missing
AN OX drinking at a pool trod on a brood of young frogs and
The Ox and the Frog 
strong.  
Time and place often give the advantage to the weak over the
thou who mockest me, but the roof on which thou art standing."  
The Wolf, looking up, said, "Sirrah! I hear thee:  yet it is not
Wolf passing by and immediately began to taunt and revile him. 
A KID standing on the roof of a house, out of harm's way, saw a
The Kid and the Wolf 
and leave us as we are."  
shall continue so, if you will only be good enough to go away,
them and cure them.  They replied, "We are all very well, and
saying that if they were ill, he would be happy to prescribe for
knocked at the door and inquired of the inmates how they all did,
of instruments becoming his profession, went to call on them.  He
dressed himself up as a physician, and, taking his cane and a bag
A CAT, hearing that the Birds in a certain aviary were ailing
The Cat and the Birds 
There is no believing a liar, even when he speaks the truth.  
lacerated or destroyed the whole flock.  
assistance.  The Wolf, having no cause of fear, at his leisure
sheep"; but no one paid any heed to his cries, nor rendered any
terror:  "Pray, do come and help me; the Wolf is killing the
The Shepherd-boy, now really alarmed, shouted in an agony of
them for their pains.  The Wolf, however, did truly come at last. 
"Wolf! Wolf!"  and when his neighbors came to help him, laughed at
brought out the villagers three or four times by crying out,
A SHEPHERD-BOY, who watched a flock of sheep near a village,
The Shepherd's Boy and the Wolf 
in the middle of the night.  
longer hearing the hour from the cock, woke them up to their work
prepared for themselves greater troubles, for their mistress, no
early.  When they had done this, they found that they had only
labor, resolved to kill the cock who roused their mistress so
morning, at cockcrow.  The maidens, aggravated by such excessive
on her.  She was in the habit of waking them early in the
A WIDOW who was fond of cleaning had two little maidens to wait
The Widow and Her Little Maidens 
most beautiful of all."  
least in the eyes of me his mother, the dearest, handsomest, and
will allot the prize to my son, but this I do know, that he is at
of her son.  She resolutely said, "I know not whether Jupiter
promised reward.  A general laugh saluted her on the presentation
hairless, ill-featured young Monkey as a candidate for the
presented, with all a mother's tenderness, a flat-nosed,
deemed the handsomest.  The Monkey came with the rest and
promised a royal reward to the one whose offspring should be
JUPITER ISSUED a proclamation to all the beasts of the forest and
Jupiter and the Monkey 
victim to the sacrifice."  
shall provide the wine to pour over you when you are led as a
if you now should crop my leaves, and cut me down to my root, I
left? But I shall not have to wait long for my just revenge; for
me without a cause, and crop my leaves? Is there no young grass
leaves.  The Vine addressed him and said:  "Why do you thus injure
grapes.  A Goat, passing by, nibbled its young tendrils and its
A VINE was luxuriant in the time of vintage with leaves and
The Vine and the Goat 
mouth, and eyes, when too late, repented of their folly.  
whole Body quickly became debilitated, and the hands, feet,
their resolve and refused their assistance to the Belly.  The
yourself in luxury and self-indulgence?'  The Members carried out
wants, while you do nothing but take your rest, and enjoy
"Why should we be perpetually engaged in administering to your
THE MEMBERS of the Body rebelled against the Belly, and said,
The Belly and the Members 
that I can again turn in a moment from an Ass to a Horse?'  
transformed me from a Horse into an Ass; and how can you expect
master, "You must now go to the war on foot, for you have
under the weight, no longer equal to the burden, and said to his
clad in his heavy coat of mail.  The Horse fell down straightway
put on his charger its military trappings, and mounted, being
and when the trumpet summoned him to his standard, the Soldier
drudgery and ill-treatment.  War was again proclaimed, however,
carry heavy loads of wood, subjecting him to much slavish
the war was over, he only allowed him chaff to eat and made him
emergencies and fed him carefully with hay and corn.  But when
as the war lasted, he looked upon him as his fellow-helper in all
A HORSE SOLDIER took the utmost pains with his charger.  As long
The Horse and His Rider 
as yours, going to be King over the Beasts?"
the snare, she replied, "O Monkey, and are you, with such a mind
trap; and on his accusing the Fox of purposely leading him into
of it.  The Monkey approached carelessly and was caught in the
as treasure trove of his kingdom, and counseled him to lay hold
she had found a store, but had not used it  e had kept it for him
trap, and leading the Monkey to the place where it was, said that
Fox, envying him the honor, discovered a piece of meat lying in a
them all by his performance that they elected him their King.  A
A MONKEY once danced in an assembly of the Beasts, and so pleased
The Fox and the Monkey 
and downs of fortune."  
of yore, for it is the common lot of mortals to sustain the ups
battle."  "Forbear," said the Miller to him, "harping on what was
cannot understand what ailed me to prefer the mill before the
from counter to tail, and a man went along to groom me; and now I
Miller, I had indeed to go campaigning before, but I was barbed
of fortune and called to mind his former state, saying, "Ah!
to grind instead of serving in the wars, he bewailed his change
mill instead of going out to battle.  But when he was compelled
A CHARGER, feeling the infirmities of age, was sent to work in a
The Charger and the Miller 
Pride goes before destruction.  
henceforth with undisputed mastery.  
vanquished Cock immediately came out of his corner, and ruled
pounced upon him and carried him off in his talons.  The
exultingly with all his might.  An Eagle sailing through the air
conqueror, flying up to a high wall, flapped his wings and crowed
Cock skulked away and hid himself in a quiet corner, while the
farmyard.  One at last put the other to flight.  The vanquished
TWO GAME COCKS were fiercely fighting for the mastery of the
The Fighting Cocks and the Eagle 
blindness, I am not able to see a single thing in it."  
valuable goods:  but now, though he swears I am cured of my
I lost the use of my eyes, I saw in my house various chattels and
healed.  I on the contrary affirm that I am still blind; for when
blind, I was to give him nothing.  Now he declares that I am
sum of money if I should recover my sight:  but if I continued
speaks the truth in what he says; for I did promise to give him a
The Old Woman, standing up in the Court, argued:  "This man here
claim, and.  as she still refused, summoned her before the Judge. 
house, would give him nothing.  The Physician insisted on his
when she recovered her sight and saw none of her goods in her
healed her and demanded the promised payment.  The Old Woman,
property little by little.  And when he had got all she had, he
eyes, and on every visit took something away, stealing all her
made, the Physician, time after time, applied his salve to her
remained, she should give him nothing.  This agreement being
should receive from her a sum of money; but if her infirmity
presence of witnesses:  that if he should cure her blindness, he
Physician to heal them, and made this bargain with him in the
AN OLD WOMAN having lost the use of her eyes, called in a
The Old Woman and the Physician 
the Wolves destroyed the unguarded flock at their own pleasure.  
creatures, were easily beguiled and dismissed the Dogs, whereupon
peace and reconciliation between us."  The Sheep, poor silly
dismiss them from your heels, there might soon be treaties of
and attack us before we have done any harm.  If you would only
much to answer for.  They always bark whenever we approach you
said the Wolves to the Sheep.  "Those evil-disposed Dogs have
"WHY SHOULD there always be this fear and slaughter between us?"
The Wolves and the Sheep 
earth?'  
pry into what is in heaven, do you not manage to see what is on
what had happened said:  "Hark ye, old fellow, why, in striving to
cried loudly for help, a neighbor ran to the well, and learning
well.  While he lamented and bewailed his sores and bruises, and
attention fixed on the sky, he fell accidentally into a deep
evening, as he wandered through the suburbs with his whole
AN ASTRONOMER used to go out at night to observe the stars.  One
The Astronomer 
Those who seek to please everybody please nobody.  
soon found that he had not a hair left on his head.  
could find.  Thus it came to pass that between them both he very
old man, was equally zealous in removing every gray hair she
younger, on the contrary, not wishing to become the wife of an
visited her, to pull out some portion of his black hairs.  The
by a man younger than herself, made a point, whenever her admirer
well advanced in years.  The elder woman, ashamed to be courted
women at the same time.  One of them was young, and the other
A MIDDLE-AGED MAN, whose hair had begun to turn gray, courted two
The Man and His Two Sweethearts 
Whatever you do, do with all your might.  
soft as silk to your hand, and not in the least hurt you."  
next time you touch a Nettle, grasp it boldly, and it will be
gently."  "That was just why it stung you," said his Mother.  "The
saying, "Although it hurts me very much, I only touched it
A BOY was stung by a Nettle.  He ran home and told his Mother,
The Boy and the Nettles 
counsel us."  
not yourself lost your tail, my friend, you would not thus
inconvenience.  One of them interrupting him said, "If you had
get rid of the weight of the brush, which was a very great
would not only look much better without them, but that they would
publicly advised them to cut off their tails, saying that they
up for his own deprivation.  He assembled a good many Foxes and
Foxes that being tailless was much more attractive, thus making
to which he was exposed, he schemed to convince all the other
Thereafter, feeling his life a burden from the shame and ridicule
A FOX caught in a trap escaped, but in so doing lost his tail. 
The Fox Who Had Lost His Tail 
Notoriety is often mistaken for fame.  
mannered dog."  
disgrace, a public notice to all men to avoid you as an ill
believe me, any order of merit, but on the contrary a mark of
such an exhibition of yourself? That bell that you carry is not,
marketplace.  One day an old hound said to him:  Why do you make
grew proud of his bell and went tinkling it all over the
wherever he went.  Thinking it a mark of distinction, the Dog
his neck so that the Dog might give notice of his presence
to bite them without notice.  His master suspended a bell about
A DOG used to run up quietly to the heels of everyone he met, and
The Mischievous Dog 
Old friends cannot with impunity be sacrificed for new ones.  
after us, you would in the same manner prefer them to ourselves."
Goats you have had so long, it is plain also that if others came
so cautious; for if you yesterday treated us better than the
turning about, said to him:  "That is the very reason why we are
had taken more care of them than of his own herd.  One of them,
for their ingratitude in leaving him, when during the storm he
fast as they could to the mountains.  The Goatherd scolded them
led them all out to feed, and the Wild Goats scampered away as
with him and of making them his own.  When the thaw set in, he
strangers more abundantly in the hope of enticing them to stay
own goats just sufficient food to keep them alive, but fed the
places, but was obliged to keep them in the fold.  He gave his
hard, so that he could not take the herd to their usual feeding
together with his own for the night.  The next day it snowed very
found some Wild Goats mingled among them, and shut them up
A GOATHERD, driving his flock from their pasture at eventide,
The Goatherd and the Wild Goats 
the Jackdaw nothing but a Jackdaw.  
protested, and each plucked from him his own feathers, leaving
because of the beauty of his plumage, the birds indignantly
feathered finery.  But when Jupiter proposed to make him king
Jupiter, the Jackdaw also made his appearance in his many
appointed day arrived, and the birds had assembled before
thereby to make himself the most beautiful of all.  When the
companions, and stuck them in all parts of his body, hoping
collected the feathers which had fallen from the wings of his
his own ugliness, searched through the woods and fields, and
the most beautiful among them to be king.  The Jackdaw, knowing
all present themselves before him, when he would himself choose
birds, and made proclamation that on a certain day they should
JUPITER DETERMINED, it is said, to create a sovereign over the
The Vain Jackdaw 
Little liberties are great offenses.  
familiarity and ill-breeding."  
"'Tis not the Mouse I fear," said the Lion; "I resent his
him said:  "A fine Lion you are, to be frightened of a Mouse."
searched every corner of his den to find the Mouse.  A Fox seeing
his slumbers.  He rose up and shook himself in great wrath, and
in his den.  A Mouse ran over his mane and ears and woke him from
A LION, fatigued by the heat of a summer's day, fell fast asleep
The Lion, the Mouse, and the Fox 
Do not be in a hurry to change one evil for another.  
should perish, yet will men never want beef."  
death:  for you may be assured, that though all the Butchers
the hands of unskillful operators, and thus suffer a double
no unnecessary pain.  If we get rid of them, we shall fall into
true, slaughter us, but they do so with skillful hands, and with
many a field had he plowed) thus spoke:  "These Butchers, it is
for the contest.  But one of them who was exceedingly old (for
certain day to carry out their purpose, and sharpened their horns
practiced a trade destructive to their race.  They assembled on a
THE OXEN once upon a time sought to destroy the Butchers, who
The Oxen and the Butchers 
back a double burden.  
And thus his trick recoiled on him, for he now carried on his
sponges became swollen with water, greatly increasing his load. 
fool, fell down on purpose when he reached the stream, but the
cargo of sponges instead of salt.  The Ass, again playing the
and drove him for the third time to the coast, where he bought a
had obtained what he desired.  The Peddler saw through his trick
weight of his load much diminished, brayed triumphantly as if he
on purpose in the same spot, and, regaining his feet with the
than before.  When he came again to the stream, the Ass fell down
steps and refilled his panniers with a larger quantity of salt
lighter, as the water melted the sack.  The Peddler retraced his
fell by accident and rose up again with his load considerably
home lay across a stream into which his Ass, making a false step,
A PEDDLER drove his Ass to the seashore to buy salt.  His road
The Salt Merchant and His Ass 
Evil companions bring more hurt than profit.  
from the failure of the means of living.  
placed for his use; so that he died, not from his sickness, but
and each one helped himself to a share of the food which had been
His companions came in great numbers to inquire after his health,
A SICK STAG lay down in a quiet corner of its pasture-ground. 
The Sick Stag 
us."  
cried out:  "Pray stop, my boys:  what is sport to you, is death to
them, when one of the Frogs, lifting his head out of the water,
water and began to pelt them with stones.  They killed several of
SOME BOYS, playing near a pond, saw a number of Frogs in the
The Boys and the Frogs 
were none left to croak upon the lake.  
sent a Heron, who preyed upon the Frogs day by day till there
another King.  Jupiter, displeased with all their complaints,
yet a third time to Jupiter to beg him to choose for them still
them.  When the Frogs discovered his easy good nature, they sent
over them another sovereign.  He then gave them an Eel to govern
and sent a second deputation to Jupiter to pray that he would set
themselves ill-treated in the appointment of so inert a Ruler,
squatting on it in contempt.  After some time they began to think
top of the water, dismissed their fears, climbed up, and began
realized that the huge log was motionless, they swam again to the
themselves in the depths of the pool.  But as soon as they
were terrified at the splash occasioned by its fall and hid
simplicity, he cast down a huge log into the lake.  The Frogs
ambassadors to Jupiter entreating for a King.  Perceiving their
THE FROGS, grieved at having no established Ruler, sent
The Frogs Asking for a King 
together with his burden, himself as well."  
the Ass a little in his need, I should not now be bearing,
according to my deserts.  If I had only been willing to assist
groaning beneath his heavy burden, said to himself:  "I am treated
placed the hide of the Ass, after he had skinned him.  The Mule,
carried by the Ass in addition to his own, and at the top of all
so wild a region, the Muleteer placed upon the Mule the load
fell down dead under his burden.  Not knowing what else to do in
paid no attention to the request.  The Ass shortly afterwards
a small portion, that he might carry home the rest; but the Mule
than he could bear.  He entreated his companion to relieve him of
ascend the steep path of the mountain, felt his load to be more
the plain, carried his load with ease, but when he began to
a Mule, both well laden.  The Ass, as long as he traveled along
A MULETEER set forth on a journey, driving before him an Ass and
The Ass and the Mule 
Harm seek.  harm find.  
instead of a sheep, and killed him instantly.  
to obtain meat for the next day, mistakenly caught up the Wolf
secure.  But the shepherd, returning to the fold during the night
fold; the gate was closed, and the entrance made thoroughly
costume.  In the evening he was shut up by the shepherd in the
sheep, he pastured with the flock deceiving the shepherd by his
order to secure food more easily.  Encased in the skin of a
ONCE UPON A TIME a Wolf resolved to disguise his appearance in
The Wolf in Sheep's Clothing 
the injury.  
No one truly forgets injuries in the presence of him who caused
see me you will be thinking of the death of your son."  
I see you I shall remember the loss of my tail, and whenever you
said:  "There can henceforth be no peace between us; for whenever
some bread and salt in the hole.  The Snake, slightly hissing,
Snake would bite him also, endeavored to make peace, and placed
end of its tail.  After some time the Cottager, afraid that the
but by swinging too hastily, missed its head and cut off only the
day, when it came out of its hole for food, he took up his axe,
over his loss, the Father resolved to kill the Snake.  The next
inflicted a mortal bite on the Cottager's infant son.  Grieving
A SNAKE, having made his hole close to the porch of a cottage,
The Laborer and the Snake 
club, and drove him away into the forest.  
request, the Woodman, no longer afraid, set upon him with his
But when the toothless, clawless Lion returned to repeat his
afraid of both.  The Lion cheerfully assented to the proposal. 
his teeth, and cut off his claws, as his daughter was fearfully
daughter on one condition:  that he should allow him to extract
expressed his willingness to accept the Lion as the suitor of his
hit upon this expedient to rid himself of his importunities.  He
Father, unwilling to grant, and yet afraid to refuse his request,
A LION demanded the daughter of a woodcutter in marriage.  The
The Lion in Love 
Do not attempt too much at once.  
the quantity, and you will readily draw out your hand."  
disappointment.  A bystander said to him, "Be satisfied with half
withdraw his hand, he burst into tears and bitterly lamented his
pitcher.  Unwilling to lose his filberts, and yet unable to
his hand, he was prevented from doing so by the neck of the
as many as he could possibly hold, but when he tried to pull out
A BOY put his hand into a pitcher full of filberts.  He grasped
The Boy and the Filberts 
life."
for your wool, or your milk, but he lays hold on me for my very
handling and mine are very different things.  He catches you only
us, and we do not cry out."  To this the Pig replied, "Your
complained of his distressing cries, saying, "He often handles
and squeaked and resisted violently.  The Sheep and the Goat
On one occasion when the shepherd laid hold of him, he grunted
A YOUNG PIG was shut up in a fold-yard with a Goat and a Sheep. 
The Piglet, the Sheep, and the Goat 
shall not remain supperless"; and he made a meal of him.  
The Cat replied, "Although you abound in specious apologies, I
benefit of men, that they might rise in time for their labors. 
The Cock defended himself by saying that he did this for the
by crowing in the nighttime and not permitting them to sleep. 
excuse for eating him.  He accused him of being a nuisance to men
A CAT caught a Cock, and pondered how he might find a reasonable
The Cat and the Cock 
to be Rhodes, and leap for us."  
this be all true there is no need of witnesses.  Suppose this 
the bystanders interrupted him, saying:  "Now, my good man, if 
who saw him do it and whom he could call as witnesses.  One of 
anywhere near him as to that, there were in Rhodes many persons 
leaped to such a distance that no man of his day could leap
Among other things, he said that when he was at Rhodes he had
feats he had performed in the different places he had visited. 
returning to his own country, of the many wonderful and heroic
A MAN who had traveled in foreign lands boasted very much, on
The Boasting Traveler 
The value is in the worth, not in the number.  
Lion."  
"Why! I have only one; but that one is altogether a thoroughbred
have you at a birth?'  The Lioness laughed at them, and said:
settlement of the dispute. "And you," they said, "how many sons
into the presence of the Lioness and demanded of her the
greatest number of whelps at a birth.  They rushed clamorously
of the animals deserved the most credit for producing the
A CONTROVERSY prevailed among the beasts of the field as to which
The Lioness 
like that useless little Lapdog!"  
labor with my companions, and not wish to be idle all the day
brought it all on myself! Why could I not have been contented to
to his stall beaten nearly to death, thus lamented:  "I have
stable with kicks and clubs and cuffs.  The Ass, as he returned
their master, quickly relieved him, and drove out the Ass to his
servants, hearing the strange hubbub and perceiving the danger of
attempted to lick his master, and jumped upon his back.  The
table and smashed all the dishes upon it to atoms.  He then
about his master as he had seen the Lapdog do, but he broke the
frisking and fawning as well as he could.  He next tried to jump
master's house, kicking up his heels without measure, and
last one day he broke his cords and halter, and galloped into his
contrasted it with the luxury and idleness of the Lapdog, till at
from the farm.  He often lamented his own hard fate and
the corn-mill and in carrying wood from the forest or burdens
eat.  The Ass, on the contrary, had much work to do in grinding
seldom went out to dine without bringing him home some tidbit to
a great favorite with his master, who often fondled him and
just as any other Ass would.  The Lapdog knew many tricks and was
Ass was left in a stable and had plenty of oats and hay to eat,
A MAN had an Ass, and a Maltese Lapdog, a very great beauty.  The
The Ass and the Lapdog 
more."  
to be in good condition, you should groom me less, and feed me
his own profit.  "Alas!"  said the Horse, "if you really wish me
his Horse, but at the same time stole his oats and sold them for
A GROOM used to spend whole days in currycombing and rubbing down
The Horse and Groom 
He is wise who is warned by the misfortunes of others.  
I see no trace of any returning."
notice that there are many prints of feet entering your cave, but
within to talk with me."  "No, thank you," said the Fox.  "I
replied the Lion, "but why do you stand without? Pray enter
distance, and asked him how he was.  "I am very middling,"
to the Lion, stood on the outside of the cave, at a respectful
disappeared, the Fox discovered the trick and presenting himself
Lion devoured them.  After many of the beasts had thus
expressed their sorrow, and came one by one to his den, where the
care that his sickness should be publicly known.  The beasts
to his den, and lying down there, pretended to be sick, taking
with food by force, resolved to do so by artifice.  He returned
A LION, unable from old age and infirmities to provide himself
The Sick Lion 
not make the slightest use of it."  
service; for when the gold was there, you had it not, as you did
gold is still lying there.  It will do you quite the same
go and take a stone, and place it in the hole, and fancy that the
grief and learning the cause, said, "Pray do not grieve so; but
make loud lamentations.  A neighbor, seeing him overcome with
visit, found the hole empty and began to tear his hair and to
came to the lump of gold, and stole it.  The Miser, on his next
discovered the secret of the hidden treasure, and digging down,
visits to the spot and decided to watch his movements.  He soon
went to look at daily.  One of his workmen observed his frequent
buried in a hole in the ground by the side of an old wall and
A MISER sold all that he had and bought a lump of gold, which he
The Miser 
Do not attempt to hide things which cannot be hid.  
though I be silent."  
The Goat replied, "Why, you silly fellow, the horn will speak
and breaking its horn, begged the Goat not to tell his master. 
attention to the summons.  At last the Goatherd threw a stone,
He whistled and sounded his horn in vain; the straggler paid no
A GOATHERD had sought to bring back a stray goat to his flock. 
The Goat and the Goatherd 
Change of habit cannot alter Nature.  
their color, while through want of food he perished.  
cleansing his feathers as often as he would, he could not change
living, and took up residence in the lakes and pools.  But
Raven left the altars in the neighborhood where he picked up his
color arose from his washing in the water in which he swam, the
beautiful plumage.  Supposing that the Swan's splendid white
A RAVEN saw a Swan and desired to secure for himself the same
The Raven and the Swan 
Zeal should not outrun discretion.  
one of the bystanders.  
her wings by the blow, she fell to the ground, and was caught by
against the signboard, jarring herself terribly.  Having broken
she flew towards it with a loud whir and unwittingly dashed
painted on a signboard.  Not supposing it to be only a picture,
A PIGEON, oppressed by excessive thirst, saw a goblet of water
The Thirsty Pigeon 
Those who suffer most cry out the least.  
you, ought to cry out."  
do you make so much noise? We bear all the labor, and we, not
Oxen, turning round, thus addressed the wheels:  "Hullo there! why
Oxen.  The Axle-trees groaned and creaked terribly; whereupon the
A HEAVY WAGON was being dragged along a country lane by a team of
The Oxen and the Axle-Trees 
Misfortune tests the sincerity of friends.  
deserts you at the approach of danger."  
advice," his companion replied.  "Never travel with a friend who
what it was the Bear had whispered in his ear.  "He gave me this
descended from the tree, and jocularly inquired of his friend
a dead body.  When he was quite gone, the other Traveler
could.  The Bear soon left him, for it is said he will not touch
his breath, and feigned the appearance of death as much as he
up and felt him with his snout, and smelt him all over, he held
must be attacked, fell flat on the ground, and when the Bear came
concealed himself in the branches.  The other, seeing that he
their path.  One of them climbed up quickly into a tree and
TWO MEN were traveling together, when a Bear suddenly met them on
The Bear and the Two Travelers 
Look before you leap.  
dangers from which you had no means of escape."  
before you had inspected the way up, nor have exposed yourself to
as you have hairs in your beard, you would never have gone down
"You foolish old fellow! If you had as many brains in your head
him for breaking his promise, he turned around and cried out,
well and made off as fast as he could.  When the Goat upbraided
himself with the Goat's horns, he safely reached the mouth of the
readily assented and the Fox leaped upon his back.  Steadying
your back and escape, and will help you out afterwards."  The Goat
your forefeet upon the wall and bend your head, I will run up
scheme for their common escape.  "If," said he, "you will place
informed him of the difficulty they were both in and suggested a
thirst, thoughtlessly jumped down, but just as he drank, the Fox
encouraging him to descend.  The Goat, mindful only of his
praise of the water, saying it was excellent beyond measure, and
sad plight under a merry guise, the Fox indulged in a lavish
seeing the Fox, inquired if the water was good.  Concealing his
escape.  A Goat, overcome with thirst, came to the same well, and
A FOX one day fell into a deep well and could find no means of
The Fox and the Goat 
who can."  
cannot eat the hay himself, and yet refuses to allow those to eat
"What a selfish Dog!"  said one of them to his companions; "he
the oxen from eating the hay which had been placed for them. 
A DOG lay in a manger, and by his growling and snapping prevented
The Dog in the Manger 
If words suffice not, blows must follow.  
earnest what he can do."  
man is no longer content to scare us, but begins to show us in
to each other, "It is time for us to be off to Liliput:  for this
number.  The remaining birds at once forsook his fields, crying
on seeing this, charged his sling with stones, and killed a great
ceased to take any notice of it and would not move.  The Farmer,
the birds found that the sling was only swung in the air, they
empty sling, chased them away by the terror he inspired; but when
sown with wheat.  For a long time the Farmer, brandishing an
SOME CRANES made their feeding grounds on some plowlands newly
The Farmer and the Cranes 
One story is good, till another is told.  
under the paw of the Lion."  
Lions knew how to erect statues, you would see the Man placed
Lion replied:  "This statue was made by one of you men.  If we
we are, and how we prevail over even the king of beasts."  The
Man."  The traveler pointed to it and said:  "See there! How strong
statue carved in stone, which represented "a Lion strangled by a
strength and prowess.  As they were disputing, they passed a
began to boast of their respective superiority to each other in
A MAN and a Lion traveled together through the forest.  They soon
The Man and the Lion 
Pleasure bought with pains, hurts.  
a little pleasure we have destroyed ourselves."  
they exclaimed, "O foolish creatures that we are, for the sake of
themselves, and were suffocated.  Just as they were expiring,
honey that they could not use their wings, nor release
ate greedily.  Their feet, however, became so smeared with the
overturned in a housekeeper's room, and placing their feet in it,
A NUMBER of Flies were attracted to a jar of honey which had been
The Flies and the Honey-Pot 
If men had all they wished, they would be often ruined.   
earth?'  
with wings and clouds, who can with difficulty move about on the
death:  "I have deserved my present fate; for what had I to do
her shell to pieces.  The Tortoise exclaimed in the moment of
suddenly he let her go, and she fell on a lofty mountain, dashing
taking her up in his talons he carried her almost to the clouds 
the Red Sea."  "I will teach you to fly then," said the Eagle; and
her in the air.  "I will give you," she said, "all the riches of
reward she would give him if he would take her aloft and float
An Eagle, hovering near, heard her lamentation and demanded what
sea-birds of her hard fate, that no one would teach her to fly. 
A TORTOISE, lazily basking in the sun, complained to the
The Tortoise and the Eagle  
leisure.  
immediately clutched the Fox, and attacked the Ass at his
should fall into it.  The Lion, seeing that the Ass was secured,
be injured, the Fox led him to a deep pit and arranged that he
to harm the Fox.  Then, upon assuring the Ass that he would not
him the capture of the Ass if the Lion would pledge his word not
imminent danger, approached the Lion and promised to contrive for
had not proceeded far when they met a Lion.  The Fox, seeing
their mutual protection, went out into the forest to hunt.  They
THE ASS and the Fox, having entered into partnership together for
The Ass, the Fox, and the Lion 
Don't make much ado about nothing.  
of some terrible calamity, out came a Mouse.  
was the matter.  While they were assembled in anxious expectation
were heard, and crowds of people came from all parts to see what
A MOUNTAIN was once greatly agitated.  Loud groans and noises
The Mountain in Labor 
Fair weather friends are not worth much.  
winter."  
all very well in the spring, but mine protect me against the
The Crow put an end to the dispute by saying, "Your feathers are
THE SWALLOW and the Crow had a contention about their plumage. 
The Swallow and the Crow 
that you would eat the dead and not the living."  
A Fox hearing these words said with a smile to the Bear, "Oh!
such respect for him that he would not even touch his dead body. 
animals he was the most tender in his regard for man, for he had
A BEAR boasted very much of his philanthropy, saying that of all
The Bear and the Fox 
No arguments will give courage to the coward.  
fast as I can."  
the bark of a single dog I feel ready to faint, and fly away as
is true.  I have the advantages you mention, but when I hear even
She smiled, and said:  "I know full well, my son, that all you say
a defense; why, then, O Mother! do the hounds frighten you so?"
and swifter, and more used to running, and you have your horns as
A YOUNG FAWN once said to his Mother, "You are larger than a dog,
The Fawn and His Mother 
The greatest kindness will not bind the ungrateful.  
rightly served for pitying a scoundrel."  
wound.  "Oh," cried the Farmer with his last breath, "I am
natural instincts, bit its benefactor, inflicting on him a mortal
The Snake was quickly revived by the warmth, and resuming its
had compassion on it, and taking it up, placed it in his bosom. 
ONE WINTER a Farmer found a Snake stiff and frozen with cold.  He
The Farmer and the Snake 
Birds of a feather flock together.   
must die in their company."  
this:  I have taken you with these robbers, the Cranes, and you 
laughed aloud and said, "It may be all as you say, I only know 
they are not the least like those of a Crane."   The Farmer 
slave for my father and mother.  Look too, at my feathers--
Stork, a bird of excellent character; and see how I love and
limb should excite your pity.  Besides, I am no Crane, I am a
me, Master," he said, "and let me go free this once.  My broken
earnestly beseeching the Farmer to spare his life.  "Pray save
trapped a Stork that had fractured his leg in the net and was
number of Cranes, which came to pick up his seed.  With them he
A FARMER placed nets on his newly-sown plowlands and caught a
The Farmer and the Stork 
such vain disputings."  
tone:  "Pray, my dear friends, in my presence at least cease from
the neighboring hedge lifted up its voice, and said in a boastful
beautiful.  When their strife was at its height, a Bramble from
THE POMEGRANATE and Apple-Tree disputed as to which was the most
The Pomegranate, Apple-Tree, and Bramble 
Slow but steady wins the race.  
fatigue.  
had reached the goal, and was comfortably dozing after her
waking up, and moving as fast as he could, he saw the Tortoise
The Hare, lying down by the wayside, fell fast asleep.  At last
with a slow but steady pace straight to the end of the course. 
together.  The Tortoise never for a moment stopped, but went on
goal.  On the day appointed for the race the two started
they agreed that the Fox should choose the course and fix the
assertion to be simply impossible, assented to the proposal; and
wind, I will beat you in a race."  The Hare, believing her
Tortoise, who replied, laughing:  "Though you be swift as the
A HARE one day ridiculed the short feet and slow pace of the
The Hare and the Tortoise 
only secure my own escape from him in safety."  
willingly add a full-grown Bull to the Calf I have lost, if I may
robbed me; but now that I have discovered the thief, I would
Guardian Deities of the forest if I could only find out who had
heaven, and said:  "Just now I vowed to offer a lamb to the
Terrified at the sight, he lifted his eyes and his hands to
small hillock, he saw at its foot a Lion feeding on the Calf. 
Deities of the forest.  Not long afterwards, as he ascended a
would offer a lamb in sacrifice to Hermes, Pan, and the Guardian
if he could only discover the thief who had stolen the Calf, he
the fold.  After a long and fruitless search, he made a vow that,
A HERDSMAN tending his flock in a forest lost a Bull-calf from
The Herdsman and the Lost Bull 
are not only blind, but that you have lost your sense of smell.  
is a pebble."  His Mother exclaimed:  "My son, I am afraid that you
frankincense, and asked, "What is it?'  The young Mole said, "It
his mistake, his Mother placed before him a few grains of
am sure than I can see, Mother!"  In the desire to prove to him
A MOLE, a creature blind from birth, once said to his Mother:  "I
The Mole and His Mother 
his own, because the stream swept it away.  
which he grasped at in the water, because it was a shadow; and
Dog to get his larger piece from him.  He thus lost both:  that
immediately let go of his own, and fiercely attacked the other
of another Dog, with a piece of meat double his own in size.  He
his mouth, saw his own shadow in the water and took it for that
A DOG, crossing a bridge over a stream with a piece of flesh in
The Dog and the Shadow 
The loiterer often blames delay on his more active friend.  
quite ready; it is you for whom I am waiting."  
instantly."  The Dog, wagging his tail, replied:  "O, master! I am
there gaping? Everything is ready but you, so come with me
door stretching himself.  He asked him sharply:  "Why do you stand
A TRAVELER about to set out on a journey saw his Dog stand at the
The Traveler and His Dog 
winter."  
to sing all the summer, you must dance supperless to bed in the
singing."  They then said in derision:  "If you were foolish enough
replied, "I had not leisure enough.  I passed the days in
him, "Why did you not treasure up food during the summer?'  He
by and earnestly begged for a little food.  The Ants inquired of
in the summertime.  A Grasshopper, perishing with famine, passed
THE ANTS were spending a fine winter's day drying grain collected
The Ants and the Grasshopper 
Self-help is the best help.   
depend upon it you will henceforth pray in vain."  
for help, until you have done your best to help yourself, or
wheels, my man.  Goad on your bullocks, and never more pray to me
said, appeared and thus addressed him:  "Put your shoulders to the
loud cries to Hercules to come and help him.  Hercules, it is
and aghast, stood looking at the wagon, and did nothing but utter
wheels sank down deep into a rut.  The rustic driver, stupefied
A CARTER was driving a wagon along a country lane, when the
Hercules and the Wagoner 
but now that I have ceased you do so merrily."  
"O you most perverse creatures, when I piped you would not dance,
When he saw them leaping about in the net upon the rock he said:
casting his net into the sea, made an excellent haul of fish. 
At last, having long waited in vain, he laid aside his flute, and
their own accord dance into his net, which he had placed below. 
in the hope that the fish, attracted by his melody, would of
seashore.  Standing on a projecting rock, he played several tunes
A FISHERMAN skilled in music took his flute and his nets to the
The Fisherman Piping 
escape injury for your pains.  
In serving the wicked, expect no reward, and be thankful if you
mouth and jaws of a wolf."  
having been permitted to draw out your head in safety from the
"Why, you have surely already had a sufficient recompense, in
payment, the Wolf, grinning and grinding his teeth, exclaimed:
When the Crane had extracted the bone and demanded the promised
large sum, to put her head into his mouth and draw out the bone. 
A WOLF who had a bone stuck in his throat hired a Crane, for a
The Wolf and the Crane 
life.  
of the strong."  And after the Hare said this, he ran for his
which the weak shall take their place with impunity by the side
amity.  The Hare said, "Oh, how I have longed to see this day, in
the Dog and the Hare, should live together in perfect peace and
and the Lamb, the Panther and the Kid, the Tiger and the Stag,
and drew up conditions for a universal league, in which the Wolf
proclamation for a general assembly of all the birds and beasts,
as a king could be.  During his reign he made a royal
was neither wrathful, cruel, nor tyrannical, but just and gentle
THE BEASTS of the field and forest had a Lion as their king.  He
The Kingdom of the Lion 
rather have one barleycorn than all the jewels in the world."  
first estate; but I have found thee for no purpose.  I would
not I, he would have taken thee up, and have set thee in thy
precious stone and exclaimed:  "If your owner had found thee, and
A COCK, scratching for food for himself and his hens, found a
The Cock and the Jewel 
all your locusts too!"  
If you had but touched me, my friend, you would have lost me, and
out his hand to take him.  The Scorpion, showing his sting, said:
when he saw a Scorpion, and mistaking him for a locust, reached
A BOY was hunting for locusts.  He had caught a goodly number,
The Boy Hunting Locusts 
sticks."
divided among yourselves, you will be broken as easily as these
uninjured by all the attempts of your enemies; but if you are
mind, and unite to assist each other, you will be as this faggot,
then addressed them in these words:  "My sons, if you are of one
them into his sons' hands, upon which they broke them easily.  He
faggot, took the sticks separately, one by one, and again put
their strength, and were not able to do it.  He next opened the
and ordered them to break it in pieces.  They tried with all
placed the faggot into the hands of each of them in succession,
them to bring him a bundle of sticks.  When they had done so, he
of the evils of disunion; and for this purpose he one day told
exhortations, he determined to give them a practical illustration
among themselves.  When he failed to heal their disputes by his
A FATHER had a family of sons who were perpetually quarreling
The Father and His Sons 
Like will draw like.   
with your charcoal."
for whatever I should whiten, you would immediately blacken again
replied, "The arrangement is impossible as far as I am concerned,
that their housekeeping expenses would be lessened.  The Fuller
with him, saying that they should be far better neighbors and
he met a friend, a Fuller, and entreated him to come and live
A CHARCOAL-BURNER carried on his trade in his own house.  One day
The Charcoal-Burner and the Fuller 
a Lion."  
you know that it is possible for even a Mouse to con benefits on
expecting to receive from me any repayment of your favor; I now
"You ridiculed the idea of my ever being able to help you,
with his teeth, and set him free, exclaim
ground.  The Mouse, recognizing his roar, came gnawed the rope
Lion was caught by some hunters, who bound him by st ropes to the
laughed and let him go.  It happened shortly after this that the
my life, I would be sure to repay your kindness."  The Lion
the Mouse piteously entreated, saying:  "If you would only spare
Rising up angrily, he caught him and was about to kill him, when
A LION was awakened from sleep by a Mouse running over his face. 
The Lion and the Mouse 
he would live only upon dew, and in a short time died of hunger. 
beautiful voices.  They replied, "The dew."  The Ass resolved that
demanded what sort of food they lived on to give them such
enchanted; and, desiring to possess the same charms of melody,
AN ASS having heard some Grasshoppers chirping, was highly
The Ass and the Grasshopper 
It is wise to turn circumstances to good account.  
time escaped.  
assured him that he was not a mouse, but a bat, and thus a second
Weasel said that he had a special hostility to mice.  The Bat
another Weasel, whom he likewise entreated not to eat him.  The
afterwards the Bat again fell to the ground and was caught by
not a bird, but a mouse, and thus was set free. Shortly
nature the enemy of all birds.  The Bat assured him that he was
to be spared his life.  The Weasel refused, saying that he was by
A BAT who fell upon the ground and was caught by a Weasel pleaded
The Bat and the Weasels 
his tyranny.
one of my imputations."  The tyrant will always find a pretext for
"Well! I won't remain supperless, even though you refute every
to me."  Upon which the Wolf seized him and ate him up, saying,
drank water, for as yet my mother's milk is both food and drink
"You drink of my well."  "No," exclaimed the Lamb, "I never yet
the Lamb, "I have not yet tasted grass."  Again said the Wolf,
said the Wolf, "You feed in my pasture."  "No, good sir," replied
the Lamb in a mournful tone of voice, "I was not then born."  Then
"Sirrah, last year you grossly insulted me."  "Indeed," bleated
Lamb the Wolf's right to eat him.  He thus addressed him:
lay violent hands on him, but to find some plea to justify to the
WOLF, meeting with a Lamb astray from the fold, resolved not to
The Wolf and the Lamb 
